---
title: "2025-05-09 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-05-09<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Status of the Concept Draft and Coordination with Olivier

Astrid explained that no further progress had been made on the concept since the last meeting due to time constraints and personal matters. She has been waiting for feedback from others before proceeding with revisions. She also mentioned that Olivier had not followed up regarding the budget discussions, so she now plans to complete the draft based on the team's feedback and then submit a pull request. Eric welcomed this pragmatic approach but noted that clearer guidance from Olivier, as the budget owner, would be helpful. The current lack of clarity has led to some uncertainty regarding how the process should proceed. Jo shared that he had already reviewed the document briefly and would provide more detailed feedback soon.

## Topic 2: Audience and Scope of the Concept Document

The team discussed the intended audience for the concept document. Astrid noted that it currently targets users familiar with TYPO3. There was a consensus that extending it to less technical readers would require significant additions like a glossary and a more detailed introduction. Eric pointed out that since the document is meant for the TYPO3 Association, it can assume some foundational knowledge. The team discussed structuring the document so that “Improvement Recommendations” would build upon the “Current State Analysis,” with Astrid noting the need to finalize the current state chapter first due to time constraints.

## Topic 3: Technical Limitations and TYPO3’s Dimension Model

A major part of the discussion focused on TYPO3’s current limitation of using only a single dimension—`language`—for output control. André introduced concepts from NEOS, where multiple dimensions such as country and market are handled flexibly. He explained how NEOS uses complex fallback strategies and an event-sourced content repository, supported by an additional abstraction layer for frontend performance. The team referred to the official NEOS documentation on dimensions for additional context: [NEOS Dimensions Documentation](https://docs.neos.io/guide/essentials/content-repository/dimensions).

Based on André’s input, the team discussed potential ways TYPO3 might benefit from similar ideas, while acknowledging that fully adopting a NEOS-style model would require a fundamental redesign and is therefore unrealistic in the TYPO3 context. Jo pointed out that TYPO3’s data structure would not easily support a node-based architecture and warned against overcomplicating the system.

Instead, the group explored the idea of introducing additional dimensions—referred to as "aspects"—in a TYPO3-compatible way. Eric suggested taking small, pragmatic steps such as enriching routing and context with additional values (e.g., `country`). Jo and André supported this direction, emphasizing the importance of generalizing terminology beyond `language` and maintaining compatibility with existing TYPO3 structures.

## Topic 4: Practical Use Cases and Extension Experiments

Eric mentioned that Stefan Neufeind had pointed out the need for country-based content variation and that he had used duplicated languages behind the scenes in the past as part of using the [EXT:z7_countries](https://extensions.typo3.org/extension/z7_countries) to achieve this in the context of existing language functionality.

The team agreed that routing-based solutions are the most practical first step, as they avoid caching issues common in IP-based detection or user-context approaches. They emphasized the importance of keeping TYPO3’s caching behavior intact when adding personalization mechanisms.

## Topic 5: Summary of Recommendations and Next Steps for Documentation

The group concluded that while TYPO3 cannot currently support a full multi-dimensional model like NEOS, there are feasible enhancements that can offer significant flexibility. These include:

- Using additional routing parameters to pass dimension values (e.g., `country`).
- Setting context aspects in a standardized way to support conditional output.
- Avoiding fundamental architectural changes and instead building on existing TYPO3 structures.
- Clearly documenting current limitations and realistic enhancements in the concept draft.

Astrid agreed to incorporate this discussion into the draft.

## Topic 6: Scheduling and Availability

The team coordinated upcoming availability. The following absences were noted:

- **May 16:** André and Astrid will be on vacation.
- **May 23:** André and Jo will be on vacation.
- **May 30:** André, Jo, and Astrid will be on vacation.

Eric will continue to hold the meetings when possible, though some sessions may be skipped due to low attendance, particularly on May 30, which also falls on a public holiday.
