---
title: "2025-05-23 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-05-23<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Anja Leichsenring
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer
    - Olivier Dobberkau
- **No participation:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Status of the Current State Analysis

Eric thanked Astrid for her detailed work on the Current State Analysis, which he had partially reviewed before the meeting. Eric noted a minor formatting issue in the Markdown under the “User Experience Challenges” section. Olivier joined and apologized for recent absences due to workload. He acknowledged the effort put into the analysis and emphasized its value for the project's foundation.

## Topic 2: Document Progress and Structure

Olivier reported on the document's overall status, estimating about 40% completion. He mentioned the following progress:

- Chapters like `Introduction`, `Project Framework`, and `Current State Analysis` are nearly complete.
- The `Current State Analysis` by Astrid is considered factually accurate and complete.
- Competitive Analysis is around 60–70% complete, based primarily on literature.
- Later chapters such as `Gap Analysis`, `Improvement Recommendations`, and `Proof-of-Concept` are skeletal or conceptual.

He suggested potentially omitting chapters like `Technical Roadmap` and `Risk Management` due to limited time and relevance.

## Topic 3: Use of AI and Review Concerns

A large portion of the content was generated using Claude in research mode. Eric and Astrid voiced concerns about relying on unverified AI-generated text. The team agreed that all sections should undergo human expert review, especially those involving other systems like Joomla or Drupal. Olivier offered to reach out to external experts for validation.

## Topic 4: Community Engagement and Survey

Olivier discussed the inclusion of community feedback through surveys and possible social media engagement (primarily LinkedIn). The survey is already set up in Google Forms, and he plans to share the link soon. Eric and Astrid supported leveraging previous Developer Days feedback for the survey content.

## Topic 5: Competitive Analysis Framing

The team discussed the risk of an imbalanced representation of TYPO3 in the Competitive Analysis chapter. Astrid pointed out that the current draft contains a highly detailed and self-critical examination of TYPO3, outlining technical challenges and inconsistencies with substantial depth. In contrast, other systems such as Joomla, Drupal, and WordPress are only covered at a surface level, mostly highlighting capabilities without a similar critical lens.

This discrepancy could result in an unfair comparison, where TYPO3 appears significantly weaker than its competitors—an impression that would not reflect reality and could damage external perception. Eric emphasized that when directly comparing systems, the same level of detail and critical scrutiny must be applied to all platforms to maintain a fair and balanced perspective.

The group agreed, however, that it is appropriate for TYPO3 to be examined more critically in other chapters, such as the Current State Analysis or Gap Analysis, as these focus specifically on TYPO3's internal structures and improvement potential. Olivier proposed addressing this framing issue by including a balanced overview of TYPO3’s strengths within the Competitive Analysis chapter and aligning the depth of analysis across all systems in comparative sections.

## Topic 6: Collaboration and Contribution Recognition

The team discussed how to account for individual contributions fairly. Olivier clarified:

- He will not invoice his own hours.
- Others should log their hours for potential reimbursement.
- Budget is limited to €10,000.
- A proportional distribution based on recorded hours was proposed.

Astrid emphasized her limited availability in June and the extensive time she had already invested. Eric proposed excluding regular Friday meetings from the reimbursable time since those were part of the initiative's ongoing work.

## Topic 7: Review and Next Steps

Olivier will provide a To-Do list and assessment per chapter by Monday, including readiness indicators. Chapters will be checked for factual correctness, clarity, and potential gaps. The group agreed to focus reviews on areas where they can contribute meaningfully and where external review is not required.

With regard to AI-generated content, the team also agreed that it may be valuable to read through chapters even in areas where the initiative lacks direct subject matter expertise. This would allow the group to identify plausibility issues, logical inconsistencies, or misleading phrasing, even if in-depth technical validation must be left to external experts. The goal is to ensure the document is coherent, reasonable, and internally consistent across all chapters.

## Topic 8: Timeline and Expectations

The deadline for deliverables is officially end of June, but Eric noted he will be on vacation from June 14–29. Olivier reassured the team that results submitted in early July are acceptable. A final presentation is planned at the Barcamp in Hamburg. The BCC expects visible progress and meaningful deliverables, not necessarily 100% completion by June.

## Topic 9: Purpose of the Document

The team emphasized the document’s role as a living tool—a framework rather than a final, rigid guideline. It should serve as a discussion starter, provide insights into the current state of translation handling in TYPO3, and help align future initiatives. Eric stressed that the document must be technically sound, even if not exhaustive, and should reflect the initiative’s goals.

