---
title: "2025-05-30 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-05-30<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Olivier Dobberkau
- **No participation:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Survey on Translation Needs

Olivier provided an update on the recently published survey, which was shared on TYPO3 Talk and LinkedIn. Eric mentioned he had just reviewed the survey and reposted it. The team noted the survey was a necessary action point, even if the number of responses remains low. The survey has no set closing date, and Olivier plans to push it via the Association newsletter.

## Topic 2: Review and Validation of Draft Documents

Eric and Astrid had begun reviewing the AI-generated documents, particularly the "Project Framework" and "Introduction" chapters. Eric raised concerns about overly ambitious claims and factual inaccuracies, such as the mention of a non-existent Slack channel. He emphasized the need for deep human review due to the limitations of AI content generation. Olivier acknowledged the issues and stated he had already made corrections to some chapters.

## Topic 3: Structure and Purpose of the Documentation

The group discussed the overall goal and structure of the document. Olivier described it as a mix between a research paper and a reflection tool. He stressed the need for a clear division of authorship per chapter and reiterated that the final responsibility lies with him. The document should help position TYPO3 within a broader competitive landscape and serve as a foundation for decision-making, not as a final concept.

## Topic 4: Competitive Analysis and External Input

Olivier intends to involve external reviewers from communities like Drupal, Joomla, and WordPress to validate parts of the competitive analysis. He clarified that much of the content, particularly comparisons, is based on real research, not pure AI generation. However, a disclaimer will highlight potential inaccuracies.

## Topic 5: Translation Handling in the Context of Enterprise Needs

The team discussed how translation handling primarily applies to enterprise-level websites, which should guide the choice of comparison systems. Eric questioned the inclusion of platforms like Joomla and WordPress without a clear selection rationale. Olivier defended the choice but agreed it would be useful to explain the assumptions behind selecting those systems and perhaps add more relevant ones like Adobe Experience Manager or Sulu CMS.

## Topic 6: Review and Contribution Process

Eric and Olivier agreed on the importance of collaborative review. While Eric’s time is limited, he proposed using Slack to flag issues. Olivier emphasized using issues or merge requests for both small edits and larger conceptual topics. The document will continue evolving, and a balance between vision and factual accuracy must be maintained.

## Topic 7: Planning for Improvement Recommendations

The final section of the meeting focused on planning improvement recommendations. Olivier noted that much of this can be derived from the existing "Current State Analysis." Eric suggested making this a key topic for the next meeting, where recommendations can be prioritized based on feasibility and potential impact.

