---
title: "2025-07-11 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Report,Monthly"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-07-11<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer
    - Martin Clewing
    - Steffen F
- **No participation:**
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Clarifying the Purpose of Meeting Notes and Concept Structure

Eric clarified that while meeting notes are useful for guidance, they cannot serve as the full foundation for a formal concept. He emphasized that a clear, focused concept must be developed, using only the most essential information. Eric shared his experience using AI as a brainstorming partner to structure his thoughts and proposed the meeting focus on distilling core ideas for the concept.

## Topic 2: Challenges of Getting New Participants Onboard

Martin shared his experience as a new participant and expressed how overwhelming the initiative's scope and history can be. He highlighted the lack of a clear structure in past documents, which made it difficult to identify the initiative’s concrete goals. This reinforced the need for a guiding framework.

## Topic 3: Establishing a Red Thread Through the Concept

The team discussed how a detailed outline would help create a red thread for the concept. Eric proposed identifying recurring key topics and walking through them together. Steffen and André joined during this part of the discussion.

## Topic 4: Closing Gaps in the Language Layer

Eric laid out the initiatives vision of closing gaps in the language data structure to simplify the output logic. He explained that fallback configurations and the use of the special identifier `-1` (Language All) create gaps. These must be resolved by synchronizing data across all language layers. This could be achieved via a process that transforms `-1` records into fully synchronized language-specific records.

## Topic 5: Understanding Fallback Types

Eric and André explained how `fallback`, `strict`, and `free` fallback types differ. The team agreed that fallback chains increase complexity and can lead to data inconsistencies. Eric proposed mechanisms for background synchronization to maintain consistency, similar to how DB Compare in TYPO3 works today.

## Topic 6: Rethinking the Role of Default Language

The group reviewed how the Default Language currently has a structural role, particularly in sorting and visibility. Eric raised the idea of removing the rigid connection to a specific `sys_language_uid = 0`, enabling more flexible structures. They discussed the need for mechanisms that allow consistent sorting across translations, possibly enforced via new TCA field settings like `enforceLanguageSynchronization`.

## Topic 7: Eliminating Free and Connected Modes

Eric proposed a vision where all records are always connected, removing the distinction between Free and Connected Modes. He suggested this would simplify editorial workflows and improve maintainability. Astrid and André agreed in principle but pointed out that certain editorial use cases may still require structural flexibility. The idea of auto-generated "shadow records" was discussed as a way to retain flexibility while maintaining structural consistency.

## Topic 8: Prioritizing Concept Scope

Astrid voiced concern about the overwhelming scope of the initiative and emphasized the need to start with a smaller, concrete concept, such as the replacement of the `-1` identifier. She argued that writing a fully comprehensive document is not feasible. Eric agreed, suggesting a layered concept that includes clear explanations for concrete actions, supplemented with open questions and long-term visions.

## Topic 9: Sequential Roadmap (Minus One → UID Zero → Language Identifier)

The team revisited the previously discussed roadmap:
- First, remove the use of `-1`.
- Then, decouple the Default Language from the UID `0`.
- Finally, introduce human-readable language identifiers (e.g., BCP 47).

They discussed the complexity of removing UID `0` and proposed introducing a Core function to abstract `isDefaultLanguage()` checks.

## Topic 10: Best Practices for Language Identification

Steffen proposed promoting best practices in documentation, encouraging developers to use language codes instead of numeric IDs in places like TypoScript conditions. The group debated this idea, with Eric emphasizing that guidance in the official documentation should be based on existing, stable functionality rather than on anticipated features. The need for a reliable, future-proof identifier (such as BCP 47) was reaffirmed.

## Topic 11: Meeting Wrap-Up and Next Steps

Eric concluded the session by proposing the next meeting focus on outlining the concept document. The team agreed to capture both concrete proposals and open questions to support a practical and forward-looking concept structure.