---
title: "2025-07-04 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-07-04<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Martin Clewing
- **No participation:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Reflections on the Current Draft and Future Direction

The team reflected on the concept draft provided by Olivier. While there was appreciation for the effort and time that went into creating the document, it was noted that certain sections may have relied heavily on AI-generated content. In its current form, some parts raised questions regarding factual accuracy and structure.

Eric emphasized the importance of ensuring that the conceptual substance of the initiative originates from within the team itself. The use of AI as a writing assistant was welcomed, especially for improving wording and readability, but the core ideas and direction should be defined collaboratively and deliberately by the team.

The group discussed that rather than continuing with incremental edits to the existing draft, it might be more productive to start with a new structure, drawing from the initiative's collective knowledge, including Astrid’s current-state analysis. Olivier’s work was recognized as a helpful reference, particularly for comparing perspectives or incorporating selected insights where appropriate.

## Topic 2: Collaboration Tools and Editing Workflow

The discussion turned to how the team might collaborate most effectively on drafting a new concept. While GitHub and Markdown were seen as valuable for version control and long-term documentation, Jo and Martin expressed concerns about its limitations for synchronous writing and early brainstorming.

Google Docs and similar tools were proposed as more suitable for the initial drafting phase, with a possible migration to GitHub once content becomes more structured. Eric suggested continuing to use Notes for weekly collaboration and iteratively moving content into a central document.

## Topic 3: Defining Objectives and Guiding AI Effectively

The team explored approaches to involving AI in the drafting process. Jo suggested first providing the AI with a large volume of the team’s previous meeting protocols and then evaluating its understanding of the group’s goals without leading information.

They agreed that the concept paper should aim to:

- Support a standardized, language-neutral translation architecture in TYPO3.
- Adopt language identifiers based on `BCP 47`.
- Remove special language values such as `-1` and `0` to achieve clear and consistent language handling.
- Treat all languages equally and independently, avoiding hierarchical dependencies.

These points would serve as the foundation for further drafting, with AI assisting in formulation while ensuring that direction and content remain driven by the initiative.

## Topic 4: Community Feedback and Survey Potential

Eric and Jo revisited feedback the team had collected during past TYPO3 Developer Days and other community events. A structured Google Sheet exists that aggregates responses related to translation workflows and user pain points.

Jo suggested that with the help of AI, this feedback could be transformed into a more formal survey for broader distribution—possibly in partnership with the TYPO3 Association or GmbH. The goal would be to deepen community engagement and ensure the evolving concept reflects a wide range of real-world needs.

It was also noted that Olivier had recently initiated a community survey via LinkedIn. While participation was limited, the team appreciated the effort and expressed interest in reviewing the results once available. This input could further enrich the concept work.

## Topic 5: Drafting a New Structure

Based on the team's objectives, an AI-generated proposal for a chapter structure was reviewed. The group found it to be a helpful initial suggestion, capturing many of the themes previously discussed.

They acknowledged that while some headings were promising (e.g. addressing fallbacks and language identifiers), others might need refinement. For example, the concept of a language hierarchy ("tree structure") was debated, as the initiative favors a flat, equal model for languages.

The team agreed that strong, clearly formulated statements should replace conditional phrasing. Instead of writing "it would be helpful if," the concept should assert: "this is what we recommend."

## Topic 6: Participation and Integrator Perspective

Martin shared his reflections on the meeting and noted that despite the technical depth, he had followed much of the discussion and was excited to continue contributing. Eric welcomed his integrator perspective, emphasizing that one of the goals of the concept paper is to speak to both developers and integrators alike.

The team concluded the session with an agreement to move forward collaboratively on a new structure, ensuring that the result remains grounded in the initiative’s values while maintaining an open and constructive tone throughout—including in relation to prior contributions.

