---
title: "2025-07-25 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Report,Monthly"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-07-25<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Anja Leichsenring
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer
    - Martin Clewing
- **No participation:**
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Standardized Language Identification

Eric and Anja emphasized the necessity of evaluating the language context based on the Site Configuration rather than assuming consistency from numerical identifiers like `sys_language_uid`. It was clarified that the same numeric ID might refer to different languages in different site contexts, which introduces inconsistencies.

The team agreed that moving from numeric identifiers to descriptive BCP 47 language tags would ensure clearer, system-wide language identification. This includes:

- Replacing the special identifier `-1` (“All Languages”).
- Decoupling the default language `0` from its role as a structural entity.
- Ensuring a smooth migration process from numeric to descriptive identifiers.

The identifiers should be derived from the `locale` values set in the Site Configuration. Anja proposed allowing integrators to intervene manually during migration in case of ambiguous mappings. André mentioned the possibility of using UUIDs, though Eric favored BCP 47 for its broader compatibility across CMS ecosystems.

The team discussed the use of “Private Use” extensions in BCP 47 as a way to cover non-standard cases. A validator tool was shared ([https://schneegans.de/lv/](https://schneegans.de/lv/)).

## Topic 2: Structural Separation of Language Layers

Anja pointed out that the current tight coupling between language `0` and structure causes major issues. The group discussed how structure and content must be separated:

> "You have one structure and many times content — the various translations of it." – Anja

Eric suggested that the structure-defining role of the default language must be treated independently of language identification.

Two models were proposed for handling structure:

1. Keeping the default language as a structure-only layer without visible content.
2. Duplicating structural information in all languages using “shadow records.”

There was no final decision on these approaches, but the team emphasized the need for consistency and flexibility.

## Topic 3: Migration Considerations

The need for a reliable migration path from numeric to descriptive identifiers was outlined. It was agreed that the migration logic must not rely solely on GUI behavior but instead focus on editable configurations like YAML files.

Astrid proposed a manual assignment step during the migration to handle special cases. Eric stressed the need to retain compatibility with other systems, especially when importing/exporting content across TYPO3 instances.

## Topic 4: Real-World Challenges and Use Cases

Several recurring pain points were discussed:

- **Default Language Lock-In:** Switching the default language or extracting a language into a new tree or instance is difficult without hacks.
- **Record Sharing Across Multisites:** With different default languages, sharing content across sites requires complex mapping workarounds.
- **Global Storage:** Global records cannot be reliably used with translations in setups involving multiple languages unless custom solutions are introduced.

Anja lamented that functionality once easily handled in TYPO3 v9 has become convoluted due to current language handling.

## Topic 5: Conceptual Framework and Documentation

The group acknowledged that their scope may be too broad. Anja and Astrid suggested modularizing the concept — each unit should describe a problem, offer a solution, and define necessary measures.

Astrid offered to revise the existing “Current State” document to make it more digestible. Anja and Eric agreed this would be a useful base for future decisions. The group reaffirmed the overarching goal:

> Replace historically grown language handling with a unified, integrated concept for consistent and flexible management of language information in TYPO3.

## Topic 6: Planning and DevDays

As the meeting drew to a close, the team briefly discussed attendance at the upcoming DevDays. Several members will not be present, including Astrid, who will be on holiday and celebrating her birthday. Anja expressed doubts about her own availability due to overlapping commitments.

The meeting ended with well-wishes and agreement to continue work after the DevDays.
