---
title: "2024-05-10 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-05-10<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - André Buchmann
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Astrid Haubold

## Topic 1: Finalizing the commit message for patch [#83310](https://review.typo3.org/c/Packages/TYPO3.CMS/+/83310)

André has now moved the forge ticket [#102345](https://forge.typo3.org/issues/102345) from `Resolves:` to `Related:` after discussion with Eric and created a new forge ticket [#103814](https://forge.typo3.org/issues/103814) for the `Resolves:` specification.

We now believe that all the criteria have been met to merge the patch into the core. André will leave a corresponding message in the `#typo3-cms-coredev` Slack channel.

## Topic 2: Discussion on how to proceed with copying localized content

We reiterate that translations that do not exist in the target should be discarded during a copy process. We already have Lolli's support for this procedure.

We also discussed the extent to which site configuration should be considered in this process and concluded that it should not play a role.

Theoretically, it is conceivable that a page translation exists that has not been defined in the site configuration. This can happen in particular if a language has been subsequently removed from the site configuration.

For the moment, we consider page translations that may not exist according to the site configuration to be the subject of a cleanup job that has yet to be carried out and is not part of our original concern.

Accordingly, we do not explicitly take this situation into account. For the copying of translated content, this means that translations are only discarded if there is no page translation for them, regardless of the possibility that the page translation may not even exist according to the site configuration.

We also note that languages that may exist according to the site configuration but are not available as a translation of the page will also result in the content translations being discarded when copied to this target page. Otherwise, we would have created new orphaned records that are invisible to editors in the backend.

## Topic 3: How to deal with the subsequent removal of languages from the Site Configuration?

Due to the backend GUI, it is easy to remove languages from the site configuration at a later date. This leads to orphaned records. We believe that this is an unfavorable situation that should be handled by the core in some form.

In our opinion, standard processes of current TYPO3 versions such as this one should be handled/cleaned up on the core side and not by third-party extensions such as `EXT:dbdoctor` whose task should be to clean up former problems.

## Topic 4: Cross-team agreements

Eric reports on discussions with André Kraus and Manuel Schnabel at the TYPO3 Camp Mitteldeutschland. In these, it became clear that a cross-team/initiative coordination of goals makes sense in order to prevent the work from going in opposite directions.

The current situation is that there is only one team leader meeting for this purpose, in which initiatives are not taken into account. Luisa Sofie Faßbender has asked Eric to make a proposal as to what a corresponding vote could look like.

We believe that an annual vote in an online meeting, organized by a central official body, would be sufficient.

## Topic 5: Documentation of the current status of our initiative

We have discussed that, apart from the team meeting minutes, it is useful to record the current milestones of the initiative. This is helpful for communication with other teams/initiatives, communication within our initiative and the presentation at events as an additional aid and overview.

Initially, a simple list of the following points is planned:

- Topics still to be worked on
- Topics that are currently being worked on
- Completed topics

## Topic 6: Treatment of language labels

We have discussed the fact that the handling of language labels is currently unattractive from an editorial point of view. Currently, these labels have to be maintained in an XLIFF format. André has already discussed a solution with Benni Mack in which the labels are imported into the database and used from there for later output instead of directly from the XLIFF. This method is used in a similar form in Shopware 6, for example. It would then also be easier to edit the labels editorially in the backend.

In contrast to extensions such as `EXT:translate_locallang`, this approach would prevent changes to the XLIFF file from being subsequently overwritten. The labels are then only regarded as an initial "suggestion" that is imported into the DB if no corresponding label exists yet.

The situation would still need to be considered if the labels of an extension that have already been imported into the DB were subsequently changed. This would require a workflow that allows the editor to decide whether the change should overwrite the existing label or not.

The optimization of this process could possibly also be worked on as a joint project with the [Localization Team](https://typo3.org/community/teams/localization).

In principle, however, we must first clarify within our initiative whether we are committed to this topic.