---
title: "2024-05-17 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-05-17<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
    - Soren Malling
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler
    - Jo Hasenau

## Topic 1: Talk with Soren Malling from the University of Copenhagen

Soren Malling from the University of Copenhagen visited our meeting and shared his translation handling use-case with us.

His challenge is handling multiple sites in one instance that require different languages as default languages but also need to be able to use records of the default language across sites.

Specifically, there are sites with Danish as the default language (`languageId: 0`) and an English translation (`languageId: 1`), but there are also sites that should only be available in English.

His wish is now to be able to use the English site with the default language via the `languageId: 1` in order to achieve a clear separation of the contents of a language in the database.  Defining the English language as the default language would have the disadvantage that content in different languages would then be created under `languageId: 0`. In particular, the use of global records would then no longer be linguistically consistent across sites.

Eric notes that the replacement of a numerical language identifier with a string (such as BCP47), which describes the character of the language in a standardized way, is already being pursued by the initiative and would also be the solution to this problem.

Against the background of this use case, Soren showed his willingness to contribute technical support and coding to advance the topic. We would like to take advantage of this offer within the framework of the initiative and therefore see it as necessary to clearly define the direction in which we can go in agreement with the core team.

## Topic 2: Variability of the identification of the default language?

We further discussed the possibility of making the numeric ID under which the default language can be used variable instead of defining it as a fixed "0", as a first and somewhat more manageable preparatory step for a corresponding conversion to language tags.

For example, you could specify that the first language of the site configuration is always accepted as the default language, regardless of the ID under which it is managed.

Of course, in this first step, the interchangeability of the ID would only be given if the structuring character of the language does not change. An existing non-default language could not become a default language and vice versa.
This could pave the way for a later switch to language tags while power users would be helped in advance.

We note that changing the ID of an existing language, i.e. migrating from one ID to another, would be a separate issue that could possibly be dealt with in a subsequent step.

For new projects, we see the problem that a new root site is initially created under ID 0 as a prerequisite for creating a site configuration. Adjusting the default language ID would mean that at least this root site would have to be migrated.

As editing the site configuration file does not trigger any subsequent processes, we see the change of language IDs more in the context of a command intended for this purpose, which would also be able to check all conditions for a change.

We note that we want to talk to representatives of the core team about this topic.

## Topic 3: Is the ID of a language consistent?

We suspected that since the `sys_language` table has been removed, the ID of a language can vary from site to site. In this context, however, we became aware of the "Use language from existing site" function in practical tests, which already solves this problem. Even when creating a new language, an ID is already used that is not already in use in the context of other site languages.

## Topic 4: Deletion of the default language possible

During our tests of the Site Configuration, we noticed that it is currently possible to delete the default language in the backend interface. We consider this to be a bug, as a site configuration cannot be used without a default language.

Our observation is that the language that is in the first position in the site configuration when the default language is deleted instead of `languageId: 0` is displayed in the interface in the position of the default language. However, creating new records causes them to become invisible directly in the Page module.