---
title: "2025-02-14 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-02-14<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
    - Jo Hasenau
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Status of the funding request

The team discussed the status of the funding request submitted to the TYPO3 Association. Jo mentioned that he had sent the request to Tymoteusz in December but had not received a response. He had deliberately refrained from following up to avoid pressuring the responsible board members. Given the lack of progress, the team agreed it was time to check with Rachel Foucard, who had originally suggested submitting the request, to determine whether it had reached the board.

Eric raised concerns about Olivier, the TYPO3 Association president, seemingly being unaware of the initiative’s funding request. The team speculated about whether the request might have been lost in internal processes.

Jo noted that Olivier’s position as president was uncertain, as his current term was ending and no new candidacy had been announced. If Olivier decided not to continue in his role, his focus might shift towards other TYPO3-related areas, such as translation management.

## Topic 2: Community budget vs. association funding

The team debated whether their initiative should be funded through the community budget or directly via association funding. Eric and Jo argued that the translation handling improvements were a strategic goal for TYPO3 and should not compete for the limited community budget slots. They emphasized that the project required substantial investment, exceeding the €10,000 available per quarter from the community budget.

Jo explained that he had intentionally not submitted the initiative’s request through the community budget, as it was a long-term project that directly impacted TYPO3’s core rather than a standalone extension. The team agreed that association funding remained the most appropriate path.

## Topic 3: Addressing `sys_language_uid=-1`

Lolli joined the meeting briefly and provided insights into ongoing improvements in the DataHandler. He described optimizations that could potentially simplify the transition away from `sys_language_uid=-1`. His work includes reducing redundant database queries and streamlining the deletion and movement of records, which could improve performance and maintainability.

The team acknowledged the importance of these foundational improvements, as they would make future changes to translation handling easier to implement.

## Topic 4: Conceptual approach for translation handling improvements

The discussion shifted to the broader conceptual framework for translation handling. The team considered whether to:
1. Focus on a specific and immediate goal, such as removing `sys_language_uid=-1`.
2. Develop a more comprehensive long-term strategy that includes multiple translation handling improvements.

Eric and Jo debated whether a larger conceptual document was necessary or if incremental changes should be prioritized. The consensus was to wait for further discussions with Olivier before making a final decision.

## Topic 5: User interface considerations

Astrid had previously shared a visualization for the planned changes to language synchronization settings but received little feedback. The team revisited the topic and debated whether the proposed UI adjustments were intuitive. Concerns were raised about distinguishing between record-level and field-level synchronization settings.

Jo suggested refining the labels and descriptions to improve clarity. The team agreed that proper wording could resolve most of the confusion and considered seeking input from UX specialists.

## Topic 6: Potential alternative funding sources

Jo introduced the idea of seeking external funding beyond TYPO3’s internal budgets. He explained that his company, InnoCoding, specializes in acquiring funding for clients and that translation handling could be positioned as a broader open-source initiative benefiting multiple CMS platforms. This approach could unlock significantly larger budgets.

However, the team acknowledged that securing such funding would take time and that they needed to focus on their immediate goals within TYPO3 first.

## Topic 7: Next steps

- Jo will follow up with Rachel to determine the status of the funding request.
- The team will continue refining the conceptual approach, balancing short-term improvements with long-term goals.
- Further discussion with Olivier is needed to clarify the TYPO3 Association’s position on translation handling.
- The UI concept will be revisited with improved labeling to ensure clarity.
