---
title: "2025-02-28 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-02-28
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

---

## Topic 1: Issues with Crop Configuration

Eric reported unexpected behavior with the crop configuration in TYPO3. The issue caused PHP type errors in both frontend and backend. After investigating, he found that clearing and reapplying the cropping settings resolved the issue. However, the root cause within the core remains unclear. The discussion briefly touched on whether this might be related to translation handling but concluded that it was a separate issue.

---

## Topic 2: Meeting with Olivier

Eric summarized his conversation with Olivier regarding the Community Budget application and the initiative's work. Key points:

- Olivier was unaware of the initiative and the proposal submitted to the Association.
- He sees translation handling as a core TYPO3 feature and initially applied for Community Budget funding independently.
- After learning about the initiative, he expressed interest in supporting it rather than running a separate budget.
- Discussion revolved around whether to withdraw the Community Budget application or modify it to complement the initiative's efforts.
- A cautious approach was agreed upon: the Community Budget application should remain active until there is clarity on Association funding.

---

## Topic 3: Response from Tymek

Astrid shared a delayed response from Tymek, stating that he was not involved in budget discussions with the Association board but rather with the strategy team. He clarified that the strategy budget had shifted focus for the year, leaving no funding available for translation handling.

This contradicted previous statements, leading to frustration within the team about the lack of clear communication and delays caused by waiting for a response. The team agreed to seek alternative funding sources while continuing discussions.

---

## Topic 4: Community Budget and Responsibilities

The team debated the feasibility of relying on the Community Budget and the role Olivier would play. Key points:

- Olivier, as budget owner, would distribute funds.
- Community Budget payments occur only after deliverables are completed within a quarter.
- The initiative must ensure that any involvement does not create conflicts or dependencies that could hinder progress.
- A suggestion was made for Olivier’s involvement to focus on **competitor analysis** and **cross-system research** rather than defining a roadmap.

Eric agreed to communicate these points to Olivier.

---

## Topic 5: Initiative Visibility and Communication Strategy

The team acknowledged the lack of visibility in the broader TYPO3 community and the need for better communication. Proposed actions:

- Regularly publishing meeting summaries or blog posts on TYPO3.org.
- Engaging Olivier to promote the initiative.
- Creating a structured roadmap and presentation materials for wider distribution.

Eric mentioned his participation in the upcoming TYPO3 Camp Mitteldeutschland, where he plans to raise awareness about the initiative.

---

## Topic 6: Concept Work and Next Steps

The discussion shifted to **formalizing a structured concept**. Key points:

- The initiative should focus on drafting a **high-level vision document**, followed by detailed sub-concepts.
- The immediate priority is defining the approach for removing `-1` in language handling.
- Future work should include addressing **system text translations** and **external translation workflows** (e.g., integration with services like Trados).
- Weekly Friday meetings will be used for collaborative concept work in an online document.

---

## Topic 7: Recruiting Additional Contributors

The team recognized the need for more contributors, especially for communication and conceptual work. Past attempts to recruit new members had limited success, as most individuals joined with short-term, project-specific interests.

A suggestion was made to directly approach engaged community members and assign **specific tasks** rather than issuing general invitations.

---

## Topic 8: Slack Notifications for Meetings

Jo requested a Slack notification (`@channel`) before each meeting to ensure more consistent attendance. The team agreed to implement this.

---
