---
title: "2025-02-21 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-02-21<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
    - Jo Hasenau
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Status of the funding request

Jo updated the team on the funding request submitted to the TYPO3 Association. He had sent a follow-up message to Tymek via Slack and email but had not yet received a response. Given Tymek’s potential departure from the board, it was unclear whether the request had been processed.

To clarify the situation, Jo planned to reach out to Rachel Foucard, who had initially suggested submitting the funding request. The goal was to determine whether the proposal had reached the appropriate decision-makers.

## Topic 2: Discussion with Olivier Dobberkau

Jo reported on a recent discussion with Olivier Dobberkau, who had submitted a separate community budget request related to translation handling, seemingly unaware of the initiative’s existing funding proposal.

This raised the question of how strategic budgeting at the Board level could be approached and how the Association might support the initiative in the long term.

The team also discussed the potential implications of Olivier’s candidacy for re-election and whether a change in board composition could impact the initiative’s prospects.

## Topic 3: Community budget vs. TYPO3 Association funding

The team reiterated their position that translation handling should not rely on community budget allocations, which are capped at €10,000 per quarter. Instead, it should be treated as a strategic initiative funded directly by the TYPO3 Association.

Jo explained that large TYPO3 budgets typically require a clear point of contact responsible for managing funds and reporting expenditures. While he was willing to oversee the initiative’s budget, he emphasized that contributions from external experts (e.g., product owners) should also be compensated.

The team agreed that translation handling improvements should be prioritized at the association level rather than treated as an individual effort.

## Topic 4: Sorting issue in the TYPO3 backend

Benni Mack raised an issue regarding sorting behavior in the TYPO3 backend, specifically related to records with missing language columns. The team investigated the problem, attempting to reproduce it in different TYPO3 versions.

Key findings:
- The sorting issue seemed to occur when the language column was excluded from the view.
- There was uncertainty about whether this was a core bug or a configuration issue.
- Further clarification was needed regarding the interaction between sorting, connected mode, and translation handling.

Jo noted that the behavior might be influenced by custom configurations or specific extensions (e.g., news extensions). The team concluded that more information was required from the original bug report before proceeding with a fix.

## Topic 5: Next steps

- Jo will contact Rachel to clarify the status of the funding request.
- The team will continue monitoring Olivier’s budget proposal and the association’s stance on translation handling.
- Further analysis of the backend sorting issue will be conducted, pending additional feedback from the community.
