---
title: "2024-01-12 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-01-12<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
    - Sven Wappler
- **No participation:**

## Topic 1: Current status regarding "TransFusion" community budget idea

In the meantime, a member of the Business Control Committee (Edward Lensen) Lensen has contacted Jo. We will be in regular contact with this contact person during the completion period to discuss blockers or other issues that determine the implementation of the idea.

In this context, the initiative would like to finalize our testing extension with all use cases in the context of "free"/"connected"/"mixed" content translation mode in the various combinations with "free"/"strict"/"fallback" language fallback types and varying fallback chains. The testing extension can then be used to test the wizard prototypes.

The basic extension framework has already been published on GitHub [https://github.com/CodersCare/transfusion].

Like our testing extension, the vendor name `t3thi` was used to simplify possible later use by the initiative.

For the moment, we have agreed that the "TransFusion" extension will not be published as a repository in the initiative's GitHub team. Nevertheless, we would like to use the results from the development later on to be able to transfer proven components of the prototype into the core later on. We agree that the prototype/extension should ideally be replaced by core functionality at some point.

## Topic 2: Current status regarding discussions with core developers

Our contact to the core team, Anja Leichsenring, has already started looking for volunteers who are willing to talk to us about the language fallback types. At the moment we are still being asked for patience. It has not been easy to find someone, as the topic is not particularly popular. Nevertheless, it is clear to everyone involved that the topic must be dealt with, so that a contact person will be found in the foreseeable future.

As an initiative, we want to use the waiting time to structure/document our findings as best we can.

We suspect that at least during the T3BOARD24 period (13 January - 20 January 2024) we will have to wait and see, as various potential contacts for our topic will be present at this event.

## Topic 3: Documenting code sequences in Mermaid/Markdown

Eric has familiarized himself a little with the syntax. There is a [Mermaid plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/20146-mermaid) for PhPStorm that can be used for local elaboration.

Since our goal is to document code sequences with a focus on certain functions that are called with certain parameters, the flow chart format is probably more suitable than a class diagram.

In addition to xDebug, Eric would also like to work more with XHProf as a basis for the documentation or to determine the respective processes, as it seems to be possible to generate call diagrams there, which could form a basis for the Markdown documentation.

## Topic 4: Further development of the question pool for our survey

We agreed that the topic of developing the question pool should be taken up again. Jo, as our "AI representative", will be working more on the development of the basic questions based on ChatGPT in the near future. The aim here is to achieve a pool of questions based on the data collected so far, which can then be further elaborated/optimized in the team.

## Topic 5: Translation Handling Extension

André and Astrid have further developed the functionality of the extension.

The dynamic setup of the different content translation modes "free"/"connected"/"mixed" has now been finalized.

So far, the implementation refers to a few simple contents.

The use of the DataHandler still seems to have performance limitations, especially when creating dynamic content. We are not sure to what extent it is possible to improve performance. Astrid will look into this issue further.

André will also continue to work on improving the frontend output/CSS.

Once these steps have been completed, more complex content (e.g. with image relations) will be implemented step by step.

## Topic 6: Frontend/backend call of the same methods

According to Astrid's research, the method `PageRepository::getLanguageOverlay` is called in both the frontend and backend context. In the backend, it applies to `pages` in cases where there is translated content on the page.

We have stated that we will concentrate on the frontend output for the time being, but will keep in mind for future changes to the core that there must be a demarcation to backend usage in the code.

In principle, we consider it questionable to use methods in the language fallback type area that are used in both the frontend and backend context.

## Topic 7: Status of the translatable page tree

Due to the high workload, Sven has not yet had the opportunity to make any further progress on the translatable page tree, but he is still working on the topic.