---
title: "2024-01-05 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-01-05<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
  - Eric Harrer
  - Jo Hasenau
  - Astrid Haubold
  - André Buchmann
  - Sven Wappler
- **No participation:**

## Topic 1: Discussion on sorting in `PageRepository::getLanguageOverlay`

According to Jo, the sorting is only a necessary construct in itself due to the use of the `array_pop` function below. He sees no connections outside of this construct. We note that this case probably does not have the scope that we had originally assumed.

Nevertheless, our view persisted that we question the necessity of building a new LanguageAspect in this construct.

## Topic 2: Rekapitulation der Betrachtung der `PageRepository`-Klasse in größerer Gruppe

Astrid briefly outlines the points found in the [last meeting](https://notes.typo3.org/s/8gjJkDDt_) that had raised questions.

She emphasizes that the method `PageRepository::getLanguageOverlay` was not so extensive before version 12. The changes resulted from [Feature #88137](https://docs.typo3.org/c/typo3/cms-core/main/en-us/Changelog/12.2/Feature-88137-Multi-levelFallbackForContentInFrontendRendering.html?highlight=fallback%20chain).

In her opinion, a direct call to the methods `getPageOverlay` and `getPagesOverlay` should no longer be possible in future.

Jo adds that the distinction between content and pages is also questionable at this point. This would lead to problems in the Pages area with sys_file_references or inline tables. In this context, Astrid refers to the passage in `PageRepository::getLanguageOverlay`, in which overlays for pages are carried out both for the defined execution of overlays and without this definition.

Jo notes that TYPO3's approach so far has been: "You need a page for everything". This is always a mandatory requirement when saving data records.

André adds that translated data records can only be saved if the associated page (or storage page) is available in the corresponding translation.

Jo adds that it is also not possible to create the storage page in the target language only. The default language is always required.

## Topic 3: How do we deal with the default language?

In view of the discussions on data record storage and the current requirement for a default language for this, we note that we have not yet discussed any approaches that would make the requirement for a default language obsolete.

All approaches discussed so far assume that the default language remains in place. We are still unsure whether a world without a default language would be conceivable or sensible.

With regard to our approach of creating a contentless structuring layer for all data records (including pages and content), we note that this would also solve the problem that a distinction between pages and content is necessary in the code.

## Topic 4: Unfortunate naming with `PageRepository`

As we now know, any data records are sent through this class, not just "pages" data records. We note that the naming of the class is correspondingly clumsy. This is difficult for beginners to understand.

## Topic 5: Discussion about conversations with core developers

Specifically, we have the following core developers who are well versed in translation handling in mind: Benni Mack, Oliver Hader, Lolli and Anja Leichsenring (as our direct contact).

We have decided to contact Anja in order to establish initial contact for questions arising from our core analysis.

In general, we need to clarify which direction we should ideally take in the initiative in order to make the processes more comprehensible/uniform. Is a feature switch to a centralized class the right approach from a core developer perspective?

## Topic 6: Discussion about the documentation of our findings

Basically, we believe that simply taking minutes of our meetings is not enough to document our findings in a usable way. For this reason, we would like to record all recognized correlations in parallel in a central location and gradually expand them within the team.

## Topic 7: Discussions on the flow chart

We agree that we want to use Mermaid in Markdown for our first documentation. Mermaid is a format supported by GitHub. In this way, we can create a new repository in our GitHub team that serves to document the code processes.

The documentation should not only help us to understand all the connections, but also support communication with core developers and other interested parties.

Gradually, all relevant parts of the documentation will be recorded. We see this as preparation for a possible standardization of the Language Fallback Type relevant processes.

We want to use XDEBUG to trace the respective paths of the call from the database to the front-end output, taking into account the respective language fallback types, and then record them in Mermaid.

We have also considered automated documentation of the PHP code (e.g. phpDocumentor). We have rejected this option for the time being, as we cannot focus on the processes concerned and cannot describe them in our own words.

We want to create the documentation on the basis of processes from our testing extension.

We initially want to track/document the following outputs:

- Normal content elements
- Pages
- Generation of menus or content elements with menus
- Sitemap generation
- Link generation
- Slug generation, if applicable

## Topic 8: Same methods for backend/frontend output?

Astrid is aware of cases in which the same language fallback types are both frontend-relevant and backend-relevant. She will check these cases again, as we can talk about specific sections of code. First, however, we will focus on the frontend output, which is primarily affected by language fallback types.

## Topic 9: Status of our translation handling extension

We have discussed how we can achieve a reasonably sensible but less complex styling in the frontend. Ultimately, we want a nice and presentable interface for our outputs, but the focus is more on the internal processes. André will look into the possibilities.

Astrid has offered André help with the further development of our extension. They will stay in contact beyond the meetings.