---
title: "2024-02-23 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-02-23<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Application for TransFusion part 2 in Q2/2024

Jo has now reached a stage that allows him to submit the application for the next development round (today is the last day for Q2 applications).

The only point that is still needed in part 1 and is currently being implemented is the further handling of "truncated"/orphaned elements in non-standard languages. These are elements to which no element of the default language has been assigned. These are displayed in a separate area that either allows them to be deleted or a new parent element to be created. The latter step is currently still under development.

In part 2, Jo provides, among other things, that elements that could not be assigned can be moved to other locations using drag & drop.

## Topic 2: Effects of the removal of `t3_origuid` in v13

According to Jo, the omission of the `t3_origuid` field means that the TransFusion Extension in v13 is less performant than it could have been with this field.

Using the practical use case of the upcoming version of the TransFusion Extension (with recursive queries based on `l10n_source`), we will be able to practically test the concrete performance impact of the omission of the field.

Furthermore, it will cost additional performance as part of the solution to [Bug #97763](https://forge.typo3.org/issues/97763), as it will be necessary to recursively resolve where these originally came from in all displayed target languages. In large use cases with pages using, for example, 50 languages and 100 elements that are displayed simultaneously, this process will consume considerably more performance in comparison.

According to Lolli, the introduction of a new field should be avoided at all costs, regardless of performance. For this reason, we believe that the only solution to the problems mentioned is to create CTE queries.

## Topic 3: Differentiation between `pages` and `tt_content` in the DataHandler

Up to now, the DataHandler has distinguished between `pages` and `tt_content` data records using an if query. This dates back to the time when the table `pages_language_overlay` still existed. The distinction in the DataHandler was not removed even after `pages_language_overlay` was cleaned up.

In the case of `pages`, the DataHandler does not use the usual translation process but creates a copy of the page in which individual corrections are subsequently made, i.e. no real translation: copy-command + updates instead of localize-command.

In general, it can be said that, due to this distinction, child elements of pages are not handled correctly in translations. Data records that are attached to pages are either not created during translation or are created in the wrong parent element.

Astrid would like to understand this problem in practice.

To solve the problem, it is above all necessary to straighten out all failing functional tests.

## Topic 4: Lollis question: Free/Connected-mode for pages?

We are of the opinion that free-mode for pages makes no sense. Pages must always be connected by definition, otherwise the concept of the page tree as we know it will no longer work. Instead of using pages in free mode, you can just as well create your own page tree.

If pages are always connected, then this connection is also mandatory for inline children.

The problem with this approach is that deviations in certain languages are no longer possible (e.g. own header image). Especially for translations that were created in free mode, a corresponding deviation from the standard language for inline children in pages would be desirable from an editorial point of view.

As there was previously no mandatory connection for inline children of pages, instances have already been created that have different relations in non-standard languages.

The migration problem for file references could be solved if it were possible to create translations for files. However, the translatability of files will only be possible if languages are identified using a string, such as BCP47. With current integer storage, a specific language in an instance cannot be reliably and unambiguously identified.

An alternative migration to connected mode (without translatable files) is to automatically create a new reference in the default language for each deviation in translations, which is hidden there.

Jo would like to formulate a corresponding answer to Lolli in the chat.

## Topic 5: Lollis question: `l10n_mode=exclude`

Another error caused by Lollis patch: `l10n_mode=exclude` is no longer properly considered for inline children. He asks whether this must also be taken into account.

The [documentation](https://docs.typo3.org/m/typo3/reference-tca/main/en-us/Columns/Properties/L10nMode.html) says `l10n_mode=exclude`:

> Field will not be shown in FormEngine if this record is a localization of the default language. Works basically like a display condition. Internally, the field value of the default language record is copied over to the field of the localized record. The DataHandler keeps the values of localized records in sync and actively copies a changed value from the default language record into the localized overlays if changed. You can force the field to be displayed as readonly (with default language value) by setting "l10n_display" to defaultAsReadonly.

We are of the opinion that this case must be dealt with in any case.