---
title: "2023-12-29 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2023-12-29<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
  - Eric Harrer
  - Astrid Haubold
  - Sven Wappler
- **No participation:**
  - Jo Hasenau
  - André Buchmann

## Topic 1: Analysis of the PageRepository

Astrid presents her analyses of the `PageRepository` class. Like Jo, she has also worked her way up from `LanguageAspect`/`LanguageAspectFactory` to `PageRepository`. This class was always the "eye of the needle" through which all data records were sent in her internal company projects.
The configured language fallbacks are taken into account in the 'PageRepository'. However, some of the data passed through here does not have the expected form after processing.

Astrid notes that the data is also passed through the 'PageRepository' after the last places considered (classes of the Extbase context 'Typo3DbQueryParser' and 'Typo3QuerySettings').
In the case of the output of normal pages, this does not necessarily seem to be the case.

From TYPO3 11 to TYPO3 13, the `getLanguageOverlay` method has changed considerably. Most data records are passed through here. However, there are exceptions (e.g. content elements with menus).

## Topic 2: Language ID vs. content ID

There was still a lack of clarity regarding the use of a languageId versus a contentId in connection with the method `PageRepository::getLanguageOverlay`.
The code description of the method states:
> Be aware that for pages the languageId is taken, and for all other records the contentId of the Aspect is used.

The **languageId** is the ID determined in each case from the language fallback chain.

Description of the **ContentId** in the `LanguageAspect` class:
> Contains the language UID of the content records that should be overlaid to would be fetched. This is especially useful when a page requested with language=4 should fall back to showing content of language=2 (see fallbackChain)

The distinction between the two IDs is not yet entirely clear to us. We suspect legacy reasons and want to investigate in more detail to what extent this distinction will still be necessary in the future.

## Topic 3: Confusing parts in the code

In `PageRepository::getLanguageOverlay`, line 413 checks whether overlays are to be performed (`$languageAspect->getOverlayType() === LanguageAspect::OVERLAYS_MIXED`). If it is the `pages` table, then basically the same thing is done in this if block as well as in the else block.
Although it is fundamentally clear that pages must be treated differently (always a return is necessary), we see this as making the code more difficult to read/understand. We wonder whether this could be simplified.

In `PageRepository::getLanguageOverlay` the language fallback chain is sorted back in line 415. After checking, this is also necessary at this point. The question remains as to why this sorting does not correspond to the desired sorting at all. In our opinion, the sorting should be delivered correctly across the board. The subsequent sorting seems like a workaround to us.

In `PageRepository::getPagesOverlay` in line 510 the `LanguageAspect` is reassembled. We wonder whether this is really necessary. The reason for the redefinition seems to be that the LanguageChain had to be reordered. It would be more elegant/understandable if the `LanguageAspect` were used exactly as it is. If necessary, we can save ourselves this additional construct if we clean up the reasons for the sorting.

The following call chain results in the `PageRepository` class for pages `getLanguageOverlay` → `getPageOverlay` → `getPagesOverlay`. The problem is that all three methods are `public`, i.e. they can also be called directly from other places. Things like the above-mentioned sorting from `getLanguageOverlay` no longer work in `getPagesOverlay`, for example. In addition, the fallback types are no longer taken into account in a direct call. We would therefore have to check where `getPagesOverlay` is used and adapt it accordingly in line with the other places. If necessary, this is a place that could be standardized via our central class for controlling language fallback types.

## Topic 4: Flow diagram for overall view

As we are increasingly realizing that a large number of places in the core code take language fallback types into account in different ways, we are looking for solutions to document these places in a sustainable way. In this context, we have talked about the idea of recording the relationships in a flow diagram that we are gradually expanding.

This diagram should make it clear what deviations there may be between the various cases in the output.

## Topic 5: Further discussions about centralized class for fallback behavior

Since the method `PageRepository::getLanguageOverlay` seems to be a central pivotal point for most data flows, according to Astrid it should be included in our centralized class for handling language fallback types and then all affected places in the code should be straightened. Then we should check which code duplications can be saved. In a final step, we should check where something happens with overlays but this method is not called. These places should also be standardized accordingly.

## Topic 6: Need for support from core developers to take the right path

The more we develop ideas for possible improvements, the more we realize that we should bring core developers into the conversation before taking the first steps in order to be on the safe side with regard to our direction in the initiative.

## Topic 7: Current status of the translatable page tree

Sven is currently working primarily on TypeScript before we can continue with the further development of the translatable page tree.