---
title: "2024-07-12 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-07-12<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler
    - Jo Hasenau

## Topic 1: A look at T3DD24

We exchanged experiences in connection with the TYPO3 Developer Days and the Coding Night and discussed how we could use the Coding Night in the spirit of the initiative.

We also took a joint look at the T3DD schedule and the talks that were of interest to us.

## Topic 2: Off-topic discussions

We discussed various topics not directly related to translation handling, such as extension documentation, site sets/themes, site settings GUI, dependency injection, unit/functional testing, consent management, etc.