---
title: "2023-10-27 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2023-10-27<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
  - Eric Harrer
  - Sven Wappler
  - Jo Hasenau
  - Astrid Haubold
  - André Buchmann
- **No participation:** -

## Topic 1: Meeting minutes through AI audio processing

To improve our external communication, we are currently planning to transcribe audio recordings of our weekly team meetings and then automatically process them in the form of minutes using AI technology. In this way, we ourselves will have a thought support about what was discussed and we will be able to make our activity and thoughts more visible to the outside world.

In order to achieve the goals of the initiative, sooner or later we will reach the point where Breaking Changes will have to flow into the Core. Even though we do our best to introduce them for the end-user with the least possible additional effort during upgrades, it is important to constantly educate about our work in order to get the necessary acceptance for the innovations in the community.

Eric mentioned he's working on automatic AI-driven audio transcription. He's still finding a good workflow. He found a way to use the App "Jack" for macOS to record system and microphone audio outside the Slack environment.
> Insertion: In the meantime, it has become apparent that this form of recording is too error-prone. The next test run will be done with OBS Studio.

Recording directly in Slack doesn't work because it blocks chat functions and limits recording time. Also, we don't want to publish the original audio, just the AI-generated transcription.

We are testing the [AudioPen](https://audiopen.ai/) app to turn audio recordings into text, like a transcript. It uses AI for audio transcription and organizing the content. However, Eric faces an issue where uploading audio files is possible, but processing doesn't finish. It seems to get stuck. Direct voice input through the app works, but only records microphone audio, not system audio.

> Insertion: It is currently becoming apparent that [Noota](https://www.noota.io/) is a more suitable alternative. Which can also handle large, long-lasting recordings.

## Topic 2: Confirmation of the assumptions of the last session regarding the Strict Mode in the Site Configuration

As of the last team meeting (2023-10-20), there was still disagreement between Jo and Astrid regarding the interpretation of how the Strict Mode (Site Configuration) works in detail. At this team meeting, Astrid confirmed what Jo had said at the last meeting, based on previous field tests.

We can now state: The strict mode in the website configuration does not apply to languages other than the one currently displayed. If an element is not available in the currently selected language, then it will not be displayed. Falling back to another language (like the default language or according to the fallback chain) is not possible here. If a fallback to elements from other languages than the currently selected one is to be enabled, this is only possible with the "Fallback" mode.

The misunderstanding on Astrid's side came about because there is an individualized workflow within the company that has overridden the default behavior of the strict mode in this respect.

## Topic 3: Possibly necessary core change in the behavior of the "Fallback" mode

Astrid and Eric pointed out a shortcoming of the fallback mode in connection with Top 2. This mode has the disadvantage that regardless of the selected languages in the fallback chain, the content always falls back to the default language.

Imagine a setup where en-GB is the default language and de-DE and de-AT are non-default languages. de-AT should fall back to de-DE, so that only individual AT-relevant contents have to be additionally created in de-AT. In this setup it is undesirable that content which is neither in de-AT nor in de-DE is displayed in en-GB. It should be possible to interrupt the fallback behavior beforehand.

One possible solution is to use only the languages of the fallback chain for the output. The chain can then optionally contain the default language or not.

An upgrade wizard for this new feature would have to add the default language to the fallback chain by default, if it does not already exist, to match the previous behavior. Afterwards, users would have the option to explicitly remove the default language from the chain.

## Topic 4: Currently available language modes in backend and frontend

### Differentiation of the language modes according to context

To recapitulate the findings of the last meeting, we again noted that a distinction needs to be made between the language modes that apply in the context of creating content in the backend (Free, Connected, and Mixed) and the language modes that apply to output in the frontend (Strict, Fallback, Free mode).

> Side note: Since the term "Free" is used in both contexts, we must note that this can lead to confusion.

In the sequel, we took another close look at the modes.

### Language modes when creating content

- **Free:** None of the content elements of the currently considered language has a connection to an element of the default language. The sorting of the elements is independent of the default language.
- **Connected:** Each content element of the currently considered language has a link to an element of the default language. The elements are sorted according to the standard language.
- **Mixed Mode:** This (currently undesirable) mode occurs as soon as in free mode at least one element of the language under consideration has been connected to an element of the default language, **or** in connected mode at least one element has no connection to an element of the default language.

All modes considered here refer to connecting content from non-default languages with content from default languages. Specifically, the `l18n_parent` field for content items of the `tt_content` table is defined for this connection via the [`transOrigPointerField`](https://docs.typo3.org/m/typo3/reference-tca/main/en-us/Ctrl/Properties/TransOrigPointerField.html#transorigpointerfield) TCA configuration. It stores in non-default language records the ID of the record of the default language to which they are connected.

### Fallback language modes controlling the rendering of records

The following [fallback types](https://docs.typo3.org/m/typo3/reference-coreapi/main/en-us/ApiOverview/SiteHandling/AddLanguages.html#cmdoption-arg-fallbackType) are currently distinguished:

- **Fallback:** It is ensured that a content element is always rendered. If an element is (according to language overlays) not available in the currently selected language, the next available language is rendered along the fallback chain. If nothing is found, the element of the default language is rendered (discussed above).
- **Strict:** It is ensured that only elements of the currently selected language are visible (according to language overlays). Elements for which no translation into the current language exists are not rendered. If an element of the currently selected language has no connection to an element of the default language, it will be rendered as well.
- **Free:** Language overlays do not play a role here. The elements of the currently selected language are obtained directly from the database without checking possible relations to contents of the default language. This "Free" mode must not be confused with the "Free" mode regarding the connection of content elements to each other. It is currently quite possible that in the selected language all content elements are in "Connected Mode" (i.e. all are connected) but are still determined via the Site Configuration "Free" Mode for the frontend output.

## Topic 5: Analysis of the site configuration language modes in the code base

We found that the three fallback types that can be selected in the backend are broken down at the code level in Site Configuration into 4 behaviors. The `LanguageAspectFactory::createFromSiteLanguage` method is responsible for this.

```php
switch ($fallbackType) {
    // Fall back to other language, if the page does not exist in the requested language
    // But always fetch only records of this specific (available) language
    case 'free':
        $overlayType = LanguageAspect::OVERLAYS_OFF;
        break;

    // Fall back to other language, if the page does not exist in the requested language
    // Do overlays, and keep the ones that are not translated
    case 'fallback':
        $overlayType = LanguageAspect::OVERLAYS_MIXED;
        break;

    // Same as "fallback" but remove the records that are not translated
    case 'strict':
        $overlayType = LanguageAspect::OVERLAYS_ON_WITH_FLOATING;
        break;

    // Ignore, fallback to default language
    default:
        $fallbackOrder = [0];
        $overlayType = LanguageAspect::OVERLAYS_OFF;
}
```

The following information is also provided in the LanguageAspect class:

```php
/** 
 * "fallbackChain"
 *  - when "fallback" go with
 *  - depends what "contentId" value should be set
 *  - defined in config.sys_language_mode (strict/content_fallback:4,5,stop/ignore?)
 *  - previously known as $TSFE->sys_language_mode
 *  - defines "contentId" based on "if the current page is available in this language"
 *   - "strict"
 *   - "fallback" if current page is not available, check the fallbackChain"
 *   - "fallbackAndIgnore"
 *
 * "overlayType"
 * - defines which way the records should be fetched from ($TSFE->sys_language_contentOL and config.sys_language_overlay)
 * - usually you fetch language 0 and -1, then take the "contentId" and "overlay" them
 *    - here you have two choices
 *          1. "on" if there is no overlay, do not render the default language records ("hideNonTranslated")
 *          2. "mixed" - if there is no overlay, just keep the default language, possibility to have mixed languages - config.sys_language_overlay = 1
 *          3. "off" - do not do overlay, only fetch records available in the current "contentId" (see above), and do not care about overlays or fallbacks - fallbacks could be an option here, actually that is placed on top
 *          4. "includeFloating" - on + includeRecordsWithoutDefaultTranslation
 */
```

```php
public const OVERLAYS_OFF = 'off';  // config.sys_language_overlay = 0
public const OVERLAYS_MIXED = 'mixed';  // config.sys_language_overlay = 1 (keep the ones that are only available in default language)
public const OVERLAYS_ON = 'on';    // "hideNonTranslated"
public const OVERLAYS_ON_WITH_FLOATING = 'includeFloating';    // "hideNonTranslated" + records that are only available in polish
```
At the moment we are puzzled as to why this transformation is taking place and why the 4 modes visible in the code cannot also be selected directly in the site configuration.

Jo and Astrid plan to look at the code here in detail so we can discuss it in the upcoming meeting.

---

Next team meeting: Friday 2023-11-03 11:00 am to 12:00 am CET
