---
title: "2024-11-29 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-11-29<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
    - Jo Hasenau
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: New status of the copy to language bugfix

Due to Stefan Bürk's [Feedback](https://review.typo3.org/c/Packages/TYPO3.CMS/+/86085/comments/818e3421_ac8668e1), Astrid would like to look into workspace tests in the context of the [Issue “Copying element with IRRE element from one language to another”](https://forge.typo3.org/issues/89787).

## Topic 2: Language All -1 Tests Listing

We would like to reiterate that workspaces should also be considered in the context of our “Language All” tests.

## Topic 3: Budget request for strategy paper

Due to other commitments, Jo has to check whether the planned strategy paper can still be prepared this year. He will soon find out whether there is still enough time. Depending on this, he may also want to apply to the Association for the budget in the first quarter of 2025.