---
title: "2024-10-18 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-10-18<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
  - Eric Harrer
  - Jo Hasenau
  - André Buchmann
  - Anja Leichsenring
- **No participation:**
  - Astrid Haubold
  - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Further discussion on handling MM records in conjunction with translations

As we have seen in the past, there are various scenarios that result in the MM record `uid_local` and `uid_foreign` pointing to records in different languages. We would like to standardize this so that both sides of the MM record show records that belong to the same language in order to avoid conflicts.

In this context, the question of how we deal with translation gaps when the “opposite side” of an MM relation is not in the language of the record that is currently being processed still needs to be clarified.

Jo notes in this context that the question only arises if both sides are translatable at all, i.e. have a language field in the database. We will assume this for the following discussion.

We have now established that translation gaps are permitted at content level in the page module in connected mode, but that this behavior does not necessarily also apply to inline relations.

Since inline relations are part of the nature of the parent record, we consider it necessary for the time being that there should be no gaps in this context at database level. As a solution, we have in mind that missing translations are generated on the MM opposite side but are set to “hidden=1” by default so that they have no front-end effect by default until an editor explicitly activates them.

Jo then realizes that due to the nature of the sorting function, problems will arise if there are translation gaps. Sorting expects a record behind which sorting is to take place. If this record does not exist, the sorting could not take place.

Eric notes that in Connected Mode the default language has the sorting lead, while the sorting values in the database can be inconsistent within a non-default language. Even if this currently works in connected mode, the sorting inconsistencies in the non-default language must be cleaned up in future in order to become independent of the default language.

In further discussion with Anja, we came to the conclusion that translation gaps should be closed in principle, including at content element level, so that the behavior works consistently at all levels. Such a uniform implementation would currently have the full approval of the team.

## Topic 2: General behaviour for DataHandler synchronization of translation records

Anja notes that when it comes to automated DataHandler synchronization, it must be taken into account that some translations should be explicitly editable, while other translations are synchronized.

In this context, Jo points out the `allowLanguageSynchronsation` behavior, which can be used for this purpose.

## Topic 3: Financing the development of a strategy concept for translation handling

Jo would like to request a budget for the development of a strategy paper on translation handling topics. The aim of the document will be to define mission objectives that have the full agreement of the core team. It will then be possible to refer to this document in discussions.

In addition, such a document will be the basis for future funding of complex tasks related to translation handling.

## Topic 4: TCA cleanup in connection with the planned `enforceLanguageSynchronization`

André would like to adjust the `behaviour` configuration in TCA as a pre-patch before we implement `enforceLanguageSynchronization`. We note that there will be three states in the future:
- No configuration
- Allow** Language Synchronization
- **Enforce** Language Synchronization

According to Anja, these three values should be implemented as enumerations (`enum`).

## Topic 5: Discussion on the abolition of language overlays

We have discussed with Anja the long-term goal that each language should be kept in the database in a self-contained manner in order to reduce query logic to the extent that no lookup into other languages is necessary, as is currently the case with the fallback behavior for overlays and “Language All”.

In the context of language overlay synchronization by the DataHandler, we expect some very complex database operations. Assuming the fallback sequence is changed in the site configuration. This would result in massive shifts in the database.

Although we agree on the basic goal, we are not yet entirely sure how this can be implemented in a meaningful way. It must be possible to trigger the DataHandler synchronization in a controlled manner. We have gone through various thought processes for this.