---
title: "2024-10-04 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-10-04<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
- **No participation:**
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Copying content with inline children to another language

Astrid revidiert ihre Aussage des letzten Meetings, dass die Nutzung von `copyRecord()` **mit** Sprache als Alternative zu `localize()` dazu führt, dass es zu einer Verdoppelung der Beziehungen kommt. Die Probleme entstanden lediglich im Zusammenhang mit der Nutzung von xDebug.

Im Zusammenhang mit der Funktion `TYPO3\CMS\Core\DataHandling\DataHandler::copyRecord_processRelation()` hält Astrid fest, dass hier nicht unterschieden wird, ob aus dem `localize`- oder `copyRecord`-Kontext gekommen wurde. Dementsprechend muss im `copyRecord`-Kontext ein ganz anderer Code-Pfad genommen werden. Aufgrund der Größe der nun erkannten erforderlichen Anpassungen sind wir unsicher, wie Astrid hier weiter vorgehen soll. Fürs erste einigen wir uns darauf, dass Astrid die gewonnenen Erkenntnisse im Ticket ausformuliert und weiter Code-Recherchen vorerst beendet.

## Topic 2: Further discussion on translation gaps in MM relations

We reaffirm that MM relationships on the `uid_local` and `uid_foreign` side must be language-consistent.

Based on this the question was raised again: How do we deal with it if one of the two sides of a (language consistent) MM relation has not yet been translated?

André and Eric are still of the opinion that the automated creation of records based on existing MM relations is problematic, as editorial control is lost. Astrid's argument that the records created in this way could be set to `hidden=1` by default is also not yet completely convincing.

However, we also want to discuss this topic again with Jo, who was previously of the opinion that gaps should be closed automatically.

## Topic 3: Language -1 sorting tests

Eric has not yet had time to create the planned test cases in patch [“[TASK] Add tests for moving language -1 content”](https://review.typo3.org/c/Packages/TYPO3.CMS/+/85912). He would like to take care of this today after the meeting.

In response to Astrid's question about a possible separation of frontend and backend tests, Eric clarifies that we have agreed to combine both into the tests for the time being, as this corresponds to common practice in other tests and is better in terms of test performance. A possible division of the tests into backend and frontend can still take place later if necessary.

Astrid notes that inline relations should also be taken into account in the -1 tests in future.

However, we agree to merge small patch packages before creating a large patch with all conceivable tests.