---
title: "2025-06-13 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Report,Monthly"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-06-13<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Steffen F
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

> ⚠️ This is a **reconstructed summary** based on memory, as the audio recording was not available due to a technical oversight.

## Topic 1: Onboarding of Steffen

This meeting was primarily dedicated to onboarding Steffen (Steffen) and giving him a structured overview of the Translation Handling Initiative. The team introduced the initiative’s motivation, long-term goals, and current discussion areas. Rather than deep-diving into technical details, the focus was on providing context and outlining key challenges and concepts.

The following topics were briefly outlined:

- **Language Architecture:** The group explained the historic background of using `-1` for “All languages” and `0` as the default language, and the initiative’s goal of replacing these special values with clearer, explicit mechanisms based on structured metadata.

- **Synchronization Concepts:** The idea of an `EnforceLanguageSynchronization` behavior was introduced as part of a broader effort to make translation relations more predictable and configurable, beyond the use of `sys_language_uid = -1`.

- **Page Module Fallbacks:** Different fallback types and modes in the TYPO3 page module were touched upon, including the need for more transparency and better tooling to support editors.

- **MM Relations in Translations:** The group outlined current challenges with MM relations in multilingual contexts and discussed the absence of a unified approach for synchronizing or differentiating these relations across translations.

- **XLF File Handling and Language Naming:** The initiative’s efforts to introduce BCP47-compliant language identifiers and more consistent file naming for XLF-based translations were mentioned, along with the differences in TYPO3 Core behavior.

## Topic 2: Next Steps and Team Coordination

Steffen expressed his interest in contributing to the initiative and attending future meetings. Eric informed the group that he would be on vacation for the following two weeks. The team agreed to coordinate meetings autonomously during his absence.
