---
title: "2025-03-07 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-03-07<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer

- **No participation:**
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Community Budget Application

Eric summarized his recent conversation with Olivier regarding the Community Budget application. The team had initially planned to refine the proposal text before submission, but the voting process began unexpectedly early, leaving no opportunity for changes.

Olivier assessed the chances of the proposal being accepted as medium. Eric suggested to the team to vote in favor, as it was better to secure some funding for issues that complement the work of the initiative than none. The main concern remained whether the allocated budget would be used in line with the objectives of the initiative.

Olivier mentioned that if approved, he would occasionally join the initiative's meetings to ensure alignment between his work and the team’s direction.

## Topic 2: Reviewing Other Translation Systems

In conversation with Eric, Olivier considered investigating two OpenSource projects and two other projects. Possible candidates could be:

- **Storyblok** and **Contentful** (Headless CMS solutions)
- **Adobe Experience Manager** (Enterprise CMS with extensive localization features)
- **GovStack** (Government service digitalization framework)

The team discussed the potential insights these systems could offer and emphasized the importance of evaluating approaches beyond widely known solutions like WordPress.

## Topic 3: AI Workflow for Meeting Minutes

Eric introduced an AI-powered workflow for transcribing and summarizing meetings using TurboScribe. The process includes:

1. Recording meetings via OBS Studio.
2. Uploading the recordings to TurboScribe for transcription.
3. Using AI to structure and format the minutes efficiently.

This workflow significantly reduces the time spent manually reviewing and summarizing meetings. The team discussed possible improvements, such as better recognition of code snippets and integrating image-based context analysis.

## Topic 4: Concept Development Plan

The team planned to structure future concept work systematically. A [draft outline](https://notes.typo3.org/s/6mbaj2qiG) was generated using AI (provisionally in German for the first revisions), covering key areas such as:

- Standardization of translation management.
- Synchronization and data integrity.
- Improved editorial workflows.
- Future-proofing and extended integrations.

This outline will serve as the basis for discussions in the upcoming meetings. The team agreed to review and refine the structure collaboratively.

## Topic 5: Language UID -1 and Historical Discussions

The team acknowledged that previous meetings contained extensive discussions on handling `sys_language_uid = -1`. To leverage this knowledge, Eric suggested extracting key insights from past discussions and refining them into a structured concept.

The next steps involve reviewing the generated document, validating its structure, and iteratively expanding on the core topics in future meetings.

