---
title: "2024-03-22 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-03-22<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
    - Daniel Held
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Welcoming and getting to know Daniel Held

During the TYPO3 Camp Central Germany, Eric came into contact with Daniel Held, a self-employed TYPO3 editor. In order to get a better understanding of the editorial processes and requirements, Daniel agreed to give a few insights into his work in this meeting.

Daniel introduces the conversation by explaining that the backends are configured differently depending on the customer and that different plugins may be installed that influence the behavior. For example, some customer backends have recently started using the translation function DeepL.

## Topic 2: Stumbling blocks in the context of connected/free/mixed mode

According to Daniel, a particular editorial challenge is the question of how to deal with structural deviations in translations. He currently sees two basic approaches:

- Working in free mode and creating the content individually for the target language
- Working in linked mode, translating content in the source language and partially hiding it in the translation

Daniel sees the advantage of working in linked mode in the fact that the sorting is retained across languages. However, he has also noticed cases in which the sorting in the target language has completely deviated from the sorting in the source language. We suspect that these cases were the (already known) problems with mixed mode.

In the event that Daniel identifies problems with sorting in the context of mixed mode, we have agreed that Daniel will contact us again. He will try to formulate the case in such a way that we can reproduce it. So that we can check together what the possible technical cause is here.

Basically, we have established that it is a valid use case if the majority of the elements are to be connected but a few elements are created differently. So far, this state can only be achieved using mixed mode with corresponding sorting problems (editorially not justifiable) or by creating hidden elements in the default language for all elements of the non-default language (associated with additional editorial effort).

According to André, the latter workaround can be achieved by selecting the fallback type "Free" in the Site Configuration but leaving content connected in the Page module. In this case, deactivating the content of the default language does not affect the translations and can be controlled separately there.

However, both situations are ultimately unsatisfactory from an editorial point of view.

## Topic 3: Sorting in TYPO3

Jo points out that TYPO3 currently only has two different sorting options

- Insert element at the very beginning
- Insert element after everything that already exists

Due to this limitation, it can currently happen that elements are positioned differently when moving across languages.

In his opinion, there is no way to determine that elements can be sorted in relation to other elements.

In his opinion, saving the position of the elements in relation to each other across languages would be a solution to this problem.

## Topic 4: Export/import of translations

As Daniel mentioned, among other things, that large-scale translations have to be entered editorially via the backend, Jo pointed out the extensions l10nmgr and localizer, which are able to export content to an Excel or XML format, translate it (or have it translated) in this format and then import it again. There is also an API variant to connect directly to translation systems.

## Topic 5: TransFusion and sorting the free mode

Daniel got to know the TransFusion functionality for the first time at the TYPO3 Camp Mitteldeutschland and finds it a useful addition. In this context, he sees a potential benefit in being able to re-sort the free mode based on the default language by temporarily returning to the connected mode, thereby resetting the sorting, and then returning to the free mode. Jo makes a note for future development that sorting must be triggered when switching to connected mode.

Jo also points out that there has not yet been any feedback on the voting as part of the Community Budget Quarter 2.

## Topic 6: Editorially undesirable changes to the scroll position when editing content

Daniel notes that there are situations in which the scroll position "jumps" unfavorably when editing several languages. We note the following situations:

- Editing and closing an element causes it to jump to the next element
- In the multi-language view in the Page module, deactivating an element causes the deactivated element to be aligned to the right-hand edge.

We consider both cases to be unfavorable, as the respective editorial reference point is lost and the editor has to reorient himself.

Currently, there only seems to be a ScrollTo functionality that controls the respective element. This function only scrolls to the right and down until the element is just moved into the visible area. This explains the visible jump compared to the scroll position an element had before editing. We note accordingly that the scroll position at the time of editing should be retained despite editing.

Astrid also agrees that, in her experience, editors are often confused about the scroll position in instances with many languages (e.g. more than 30).

Jo also notes that instances that use the "Gridelements" extension automatically reload the page when elements are moved. By default, the TYPO3 backend does not reload in this situation.

## Topic 7: Feature request - In addition to "All languages", also allow a selection of languages for the display

Currently TYPO3 only offers the possibility to display **one single** non-default language next to the default language or **all** non-default languages. Daniel confirms that this is too confusing editorially, depending on the use case. He would like to be able to define certain languages that should be displayed together in the page module (possibly via checkboxes next to the languages in the language selection).

In addition, he considers it useful to be able to create language bundles of languages that are often maintained together editorially (for example, the English languages: en-GB, en-CA, ...).

We believe that the possibility of selecting languages should be implemented as a first step and that the creation of language bundles could be made possible on this basis in order to keep the respective features within a technically manageable framework. In addition, we hope that the functional division will increase acceptance in the community for the introduction of the respective functions.

## Topic 8: Save & Close

Daniel also emphasizes that he would like to see a Save & Close functionality. From the editor session at the TYPO3 Camp Mitteldeutschland, Eric informs us in this context that the UI/UX team has this aspect on its radar and is currently working on an alternative solution to a dedicated UI element (possibly via shortcut).

## Topic 9: Idea - Freely configurable backend interface

Jo raises the idea that a flexibly configurable backend interface (as already known from many standalone applications) could be the answer to many editorial use cases. This would allow editors to put together their own backend, i.e. the positioning of the various backend areas, and adapt it to their own needs, for example to have the smallest possible scroll paths.

There is criticism of this approach with regard to documentability. Jo objected that in this case it is no longer clear which layout should be used in documentation. Eric notes that documentation could be based on the standard output.

## Topic 10: Current status regarding ongoing core patches

André has noticed that some tests are failing as part of his current core patch. For this reason, he has created a second core patch to straighten out these tests.

Astrid already gives the outlook that the core patch she is currently working on is a big deal. The general topic of `l10n_mode=exclude` needs to be reconsidered and cannot be fixed directly without a fundamental conceptual consideration. Lolli is currently asking himself to what extent the DataHandler should handle `l10n_mode=exclude` at all.

We have agreed to dedicate the next meeting to the core patches in order to exchange further information.