---
title: "2024-03-01 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-03-01<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
    - Sven Wappler
    - Lolli
- **No participation:**

## Topic 1: Copying translated content with translations not available in the target page

The current situation is that record translations are always copied/moved with all associated translations during a copy or move process that aims to move the record to a new page. This does not take into account whether these translations are supported at all on the target page.

Two areas are decisive when assessing which languages are supported in the target:

- The languages defined in the site configuration
- The translations of the target page

The latter point depends on the former.

This leads to the situation where record translations are located on pages that do not provide the language of the translation at all → Overhanging translations.
We have now discussed the best way to deal with this situation.

- Approach 1: Discard all translations that are not available as a language in the target
    - a) without notification
    - b) with warning to the user which languages are not available in the target and therefore cannot be copied
- Approach 2: Question to the user (possibly as a modal): "The target does not support languages XYZ. Use Keep/Delete to select which languages should be copied anyway"

Approach 2 would cover cases in which translations are subsequently needed. Approach 2 could become confusing depending on the number of languages.

The choice of whether to proceed according to approach 1 or 2 could be made in the user settings or in another system-wide location.

We have also noted that the IDs of the languages may vary in the case of cross-root site move/copy processes. It can therefore happen that records in the source root site are handled under a different language than in the target root site if the same numerical ID is used for different languages.

On this topic, Lolli and André clearly state that mapping the languages (based on locale, for example) is too error-prone and would be almost impossible to solve. For this reason, no mapping should be carried out in such cases. The ID should be retained and the risk of a language change accepted. He sees the solution to this situation only in a change of language storage on the basis of string identification (e.g. according to BCP47). Jo adds that at least a warning (via modal) could be given if it is determined that the locale in the target differs under the same ID. Eric adds that a clear recommendation (possibly in the documentation) should be made to configure the same languages under the same IDs across all root sites in order to avoid the problems mentioned.

André could currently imagine creating a patch on this topic.

Lolli gave us an introduction to this patch idea and the process required to successfully launch a corresponding core patch.

In this context, we deal with functional tests. In his opinion, test-driven development is the most suitable approach in this case. In other words, first create the test case, then observe how the core behaves, then document this behavior in the test CSV and only then consider how the core should behave instead. This innovation can then be introduced step by step, including the CSV files.

## Topic 2: Possibility of structural changes by editors who only have access to non-default languages

Eric describes a translation handling case that was brought to him by a TYPO3 company. There is a need for Turkish editors to be able to create their own pages in the Turkish non-default language. The reason for this is that the Turkish language is not only handled as a pure translation, but that the website of the Turkish branch is maintained under the Turkish language, including the structural conditions of this branch, which may differ from the default language (e.g. own landing pages of the Turkish branch). Nevertheless, it is not desired that the Turkish editors have access to the default language.

Jo describes three possible approaches in this context:

1) The editors are told that they are not allowed to make structural changes. If structural changes are desired, these are requested from people who have access to the default language.
2) The editors are also granted access to the default language. If there is a requirement to be able to make structural changes in Connected Mode, access to the structuring language is a prerequisite with regard to user rights.
3) An independent page tree is created. This could be generated on the basis of copies from the default language of the original page and then translated in the context of the default language.

Astrid adds that so far all her customers have been directed to either lane 1, 2 or 3.

Jo adds that both approaches are more of a workaround. The actual problem could be solved, for example, if the default language were used as a purely structuring layer. Whenever a data record is created in the target language that does not yet exist in the structure layer, a corresponding control record is created in the background at the same time. We note that this approach would be a massive breaking change. Accordingly, we are unclear as to whether such an approach should be pursued further.

Alternatively, we have discussed to what extent it could be useful, after switching to string storage of the languages, to adjust the default language status of a language according to current editorial needs. In this context, we note that this approach could lead to unmanageable structures between the different languages that are no longer clearly visible or manageable from an editorial point of view. At some point, you no longer have any control over what was translated where and when.

André adds that nested root sites could also be a solution in order to be able to manage certain branches of the page tree under a different language.

We consider a core solution that enables records to be created automatically in the background (if necessary) in the default language to be unsuitable, as control over the structures (especially sorting) can quickly be lost. Such a feature would be used by non-default-language editors as if they were working in the default language. The structures created across languages can then become correspondingly complex and confusing. Accordingly, we decide against such an approach. Structural changes (even those that are only required in non-default languages) should always be made in a controlled manner by editors with appropriate access to the default language.

## Topic 3: Discussion on free/connected mode at page level

We have looked again at the question of the extent to which the distinction between free and connected mode makes sense at page level.

In this context, we note that the connected mode would have the effect that the same structures would be applied across languages in a structurally reliable and predictable manner. In connected mode, however, there would also be a mandatory dependency on the existence of records in the default language.

For example, if an image provided via a FAL field in the page properties were to differ from the default language in a non-default language, this would only work if an additional image reference were to be created in the default language, which would be translated into the target language but hidden in the default language.

Measured against the current reality that editors can freely maintain relations in the various languages, the linked mode does not appear to be practicable for the time being.

Jo fundamentally questions whether page properties should be used for frontend-relevant relations (e.g. to images). It is also possible to use corresponding relations at content level with the correspondingly usable free/connected mode flexibility. However, as fields such as social media graphics are already located in the page properties, we do not currently consider this approach to be practicable for handling in connected mode in future.

Eric adds that the free/connected mode discussion at page level hinges on the question of whether the non-default language is a pure translation or more with corresponding structural deviations.

Jo and André add that in order to do justice to this distinction, users should also be able to decide at page level whether they are connected or not.

## Topic 4: Radical counter-position - Doesn't everything have to be connected?

Jo now takes the opposite position: He argues that if it is specified at content level across all nesting levels that the free/connected mode runs consistently through all records involved, then the logical consequence would be to also apply this rule to the relation pages to content. After all, content is a record related to the page (even if it is not an inline reference). The dilemma in this context is that pages must always be connected by definition. Ergo, all records (including content) connected to pages would also have to be connected and, as a result, there could no longer be a free mode at any level.

Since we agree that this radical approach would miss the point of the current reality, we have to break the dogma of maintaining the mode across all hierarchy levels at some point.

We believe that if we continue to allow free mode at the content level, we must also allow free mode for other records that are linked to pages.

## Topic 5: Currently, the mode is not yet consistently maintained at content level

André points out that it is currently not yet the case that the mode is consistently maintained at content level across all relation hierarchy levels. According to Jo, however, this is considered a bug, as the concept provides for the mode to be maintained consistently. These bugs will be resolved in the future.

## Topic 6: Can the free/connected mode behavior be standardized at page and record level?

From the contexts mentioned above, we come to the conclusion that the behavior of pages and records cannot currently be standardized. The main reason for this is that no translations are possible at file level. As soon as an appropriate solution has been found for this, standardization can be considered again, as different language-specific files can then be defined despite the linked mode. A translation would then be possible at file level, as is also possible for normal texts in linked mode.

Jo adds that localization would then also be possible at image level in addition to pure translation, i.e. adapting the content to local conditions.

Astrid concedes that empty values should also be possible in connected mode. This is confirmed by the other participants. Just as it is possible to leave fields empty at text level, it should also be possible to leave a file relation empty at file level.

We note that the mandatory handling of pages in connected mode would also cause the problem that structural differences between the languages are difficult to handle. A control data record in the default language would then also always be necessary at this level. Consider, for example, that a header slider based on images in the `pages.media` field is supplied with 2 images in the default language, but with 3 images in the non-default language. In this case, the 3rd image would have to be created in the default language but deactivated there so that it only appears in the translation. Against this background, we seem to have reached an impasse.

Jo points out that free relations such as our example slider images could also be implemented at content level. Integrators would have to migrate the corresponding relations to content in the event of mandatory behavior at page level. In this context, we are still undecided as to whether this rule should be set.

## Topic 7: Considering the anatomy of free and connected mode

We question what it actually means to be in free and connected mode. In this context, we note that ultimately a few fields defined by default (such as `sorting` and `pid`) are either synchronized across languages or not.

Instead of the Connected Mode being rigidly related to certain fields, it could also be an approach to configure an "Enforce Language Synchronization" for fields. This would give the user complete freedom to decide which fields should be synchronized across languages and which should not. In the standard case, "Enforce Language Synchronization" could be configured for the same fields for which this behaviour currently applies in Connected Mode in order to remain consistent with the previous behaviour.

Let's note the difference again:

- "Allow language Synchronization": The editor has the freedom to decide in the target language whether to synchronize → can be interpreted as Free Mode
- "Enforce language Synchronization": The editor has no choice, the field content is synchronized mandatorily → can be interpreted as Connected Mode

In our opinion, both behaviors are useful and sensible, depending on the use case.

## Topic 8: Consideration of `l10n_mode=exclude`

We note that `l10n_mode=exclude` is already handled by the DataHandler in such a way that the field content is synchronized across all languages. In the case of data record relations, however, the reference to the record of the default language is always synchronized across all languages, not the reference to the ID of the respective translation of the related record. According to Lolli, there is a concept at play here.

## Topic 9: Database denormalization in external communication - This is out of the question

In external communication, we are repeatedly confronted with reservations when it comes to the question of whether it makes sense to create redundancies in the database in order to reduce the complexity of translation handling.

We agree with Lolli that our biggest problem is not the size of the database, but its complexity. For this reason, it is nowadays acceptable and non-negotiable that denormalization is used to reduce complexity.