---
title: "2025-01-24 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-01-24<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - André Buchmann
    - Anja Leichsenring
- **No participation:**
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Jo Hasenau

## Topic 1: Resource Constraints

The team discussed current resource constraints within the initiative. Astrid and Jo were unable to attend due to high workloads, raising concerns about long-term availability and progress. The team acknowledged the challenge and considered possible ways to ensure steady contributions.

## Topic 2: Clarification on `sys_language_uid` -1 Transition

The team continued addressing the key points from Lolli’s list regarding the transition away from `sys_language_uid` -1. Key discussions included:

### Handling of Default Language Elements in Synchronization

- The team debated how default language elements should behave when switching to synchronization mode.
- A consensus was reached that existing translations should be updated rather than deleted and recreated.
- If discrepancies exist between a default language record and its translations, a warning should be presented to the editor before synchronization.
- The system should intelligently detect whether a change will overwrite existing content and prompt the editor accordingly.

### Migration Process and Handling of Inconsistencies

- The migration must account for possible inconsistencies, such as translations that have diverged from their original source.
- A logging mechanism was proposed to document changes made during the migration, allowing for review and rollback where necessary.
- Large-scale instances should have an option to apply default migration rules rather than requiring manual intervention for every record.
- The team discussed whether an interactive migration wizard should be developed to assist administrators in handling complex cases.

### Synchronization Mechanism and Flagging

- The team explored introducing a synchronization flag at the record level to replace `sys_language_uid` -1.
- This flag would ensure that content remains in sync across all languages where it is set.
- If an editor modifies a record flagged for synchronization, changes would propagate to all related translations automatically.
- The possibility of allowing selective exclusion from synchronization was discussed, but deferred for later implementation.

## Topic 3: Conceptual Framework for Strategy Development

The team revisited the ongoing strategic planning efforts. The budget request for developing a detailed strategy document remains under review. The goal is to ensure that all fundamental questions from Lolli’s list are addressed in a structured manner.

The team also debated whether an independent document specifically summarizing the `sys_language_uid` -1 transition should be created alongside the meeting minutes. This document would facilitate broader review and discussion within the TYPO3 community and could serve as a separate concept paper. As this transition represents the first necessary step, the resulting concept could later be integrated into the overall strategy document.

## Topic 4: File Translation and Language Identification

- The discussion touched on the challenges of associating translated files within TYPO3.
- The team recognized that file translations remain a complex topic and agreed to defer the discussion for future planning.
- A key prerequisite for file translation support would be a standardized language identification system.
- The idea of using **IETF BCP 47 Language Tags** was proposed to ensure cross-instance consistency in language handling.

## Next Steps

- The remaining points from Lolli’s list will continue to be discussed in the next meeting.
- Further refinements to the migration strategy and synchronization mechanisms will be explored.
- The team will investigate the feasibility of integrating an interactive migration assistant.

---

