---
title: "2025-01-31 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-01-31<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
    - André Buchmann
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Anja Leichsenring
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Status of the funding request

Jo has not yet received a response from the TYPO3 Association regarding the funding request. He deliberately refrained from following up to avoid putting pressure on the volunteer team handling these matters. He will check back soon, as more than a month has passed since the submission.

Additionally, the recent roadmap announcement for TYPO3 14 did not mention translation handling. This raised questions within the team, but it was noted that the feature's development progress may not yet be advanced enough to be officially included.

## Topic 2: Transitioning `sys_language_uid=-1`

The team revisited the transition process for `sys_language_uid=-1`. Eric suggested developing a small, well-defined concept for this step to ensure alignment and gain approval before moving forward. Jo pointed out that while this was not originally planned in the funded concept, breaking it down into smaller steps might be beneficial.

Jo also highlighted his current workload as a constraint, as he recently took on additional responsibilities at InnoCoding. Astrid and Anja shared similar time constraints, emphasizing that available resources are currently limited.

The team discussed an incremental approach where they could focus on documenting and structuring the necessary changes while waiting for funding approval and more available developer resources.

## Topic 3: Error handling in the migration process

The discussion focused on how to handle inconsistencies in language assignments during migration. One concern was how existing translations would be affected when transitioning to the new model. The team agreed that:
- If translations exist, they should be updated rather than recreated.
- If no translations exist, new ones should be created.
- Editors should be notified when the migration alters content, but the system should avoid unnecessary pop-ups.
- A "Do not remind me again" option could be useful to reduce repetitive notifications.
- A preliminary check before running the migration could help identify inconsistencies and allow editors to resolve them in advance.

## Topic 4: Adjusting language synchronization behavior

The discussion moved towards refining how language synchronization should be handled. Key points included:
- Ensuring that only relevant fields are synchronized when `sys_language_uid=-1` is replaced.
- Introducing a new configuration to allow or enforce language synchronization at the record level.
- Making it possible for editors to control synchronization behavior per record while keeping the system flexible.
- Avoiding breaking changes by ensuring that the new setting does not override existing field-based synchronization settings.

The team agreed that this should be implemented step by step, first making record-level synchronization configurable before adding an enforced synchronization option.

## Topic 5: User interface considerations

Anja emphasized the need for visual representation of the planned changes, suggesting that even simple wireframes or screenshots could help align expectations. The team debated whether to involve the UI/UX team at this stage but decided to first draft their own proposal to keep the process efficient.

## Topic 6: AI-assisted translation handling

The team briefly discussed the potential of AI in translation workflows, particularly in analyzing and validating translations during migration. While skepticism about AI's reliability was expressed, there was consensus that AI-supported tools could be valuable for identifying content changes across languages.

## Topic 7: Resource constraints and funding considerations

While funding is available through the TYPO3 Community Budget, the team agreed that time constraints, rather than money, are the primary challenge. Jo and Anja noted that financial incentives would not free up their time, but external developers could potentially be brought in if needed.

## Topic 8: Next steps

The team concluded that the immediate focus should be on:
- Defining a small, manageable concept for transitioning `sys_language_uid=-1`.
- Investigating the feasibility of record-level synchronization.
- Creating simple UI drafts to visualize the changes before approaching the UI/UX team.

The meeting ended with a lighthearted discussion about AI initiatives and unrelated personal topics.
