---
title: "2025-01-10 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-01-10<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Jo Hasenau
    - André Buchmann
    - Lolli
    - Guest: Jan Kornblum
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Inline Relations Localization

Jan Kornblum highlighted issues with the localization of inline relations:
- New child records are created even when `allowLanguageSynchronization` is set to `false` or `l10n_mode` is set to `exclude`, leaving no way to prevent this behavior.
- The previously available `localizeChildrenAtParentLocalization` feature in TYPO3 v8 offered more control but is no longer supported in newer versions.
- Setting `allowLanguageSynchronization` to `true` does not resolve the issue, as it also creates new child records.

André Buchmann suggested removing `languageField` and related TCA configurations to disable translations for child tables entirely. However, Jan noted that this leads to errors when the parent is localized, as TYPO3 requires certain fields to be defined.

As a result, Jan decided to move away from using inline relations in TYPO3 v12, opting instead for n:1 relations. While this approach simplifies localization, it comes at the cost of losing ORM conveniences for managing object hierarchies.

## Topic 2: Strategic Planning Process

The team informed Jan Kornblum about the current efforts to secure funding for developing a comprehensive translation strategy document. This document aims to outline the initiative's long-term goals and will incorporate input from stakeholders, including translation industry experts. Jan expressed his willingness to support this strategic process by sharing his expertise and collaborating on refining the initiative's goals.

## Topic 3: Transitioning from -1 Language Identifier

Lolli joined the meeting to discuss ongoing patches and the plan to remove the special language identifier `-1`. The discussion focused on a conceptual issue where the sorting value of `-1` content elements does not align with the sorting values of non-default language contents. This is because the sorting value is derived from the default language's sorting values. The team deliberated on whether this problem should be exposed through automated tests but concluded it was unnecessary. The removal of the `-1` identifier and the introduction of cross-language content synchronization will inherently resolve this issue by ensuring that each language has dedicated records with its own appropriate sorting value.

## Topic 4: Strategy for test development

The team debated approaches to optimize test structures, balancing redundancy and complexity. Suggestions included creating more general templates for repetitive test cases and segregating tests by type (e.g., frontend vs. backend behaviors). A plan to initiate a Work-In-Progress (WIP) patch for testing the impact of removing `-1` was agreed upon, aligning with the goal to improve test maintainability.

## Topic 5: `l10n_diffsource` Field Concerns

The team discussed several issues related to the `l10n_diffsource` field:
- The field contains values in random order, leading to inconsistencies. A patch to sort these values alphabetically was suggested.
- The inclusion of `sys_language_uid` in `diffSource` was questioned as it seems illogical.
- A potential feature was proposed to allow confirming the reset of `diffSource` per field, rather than resetting everything during translation saves.

## Topic 6: "Translate To" Issue in Data Handling

The team reviewed data handler special handling for pages. Lolli has been working on a WIP patch for years and has already extracted some preliminary patches. However, the WIP patch was recently discarded as no solution could be found for the "Translate To" problem. Using a "Translate To" prefix was deemed unviable as it alters the data, which Lolli highlighted as particularly problematic. The automatic content modification caused by the prefix undermines data integrity and complicates predictable content handling.
