---
title: "2024-02 - Translation Handling Initiative - Monthly report"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative: Monthly report
**February 2024**

[‚Üê Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

## What happened since the last report?

- **Discussions on the implementation of the free-connected switch**
  - Further discussion on the pros and cons of the origUid field `t3_origuid` or a future equivalent with regard to performance when reconnecting elements in free mode
  - Dealing with newly created elements in free mode when attempting to reconnect
  - Clarification of required test scenarios
  - Consideration of inline relation scenarios
  - Next necessary steps (possibly covered by Community Budget Idea Q2)
  - Discussion of the "TransFusion" community budget idea for Q2
- **Working on patches as a team**
  - Identification of existing bugs and discussion of a possible solution
  - Examination of existing core patches
  - Examination of functional tests especially regarding work with CSV files
  - First attempts in the form of WIP patches
  - Examination of the possibility of checking/updating the existing patches locally
- **Discussion of questions raised by Core-Developer Christian Kuhn**
  - Pros and cons of the distinction between records and pages in the DataHandler
  - Free/connected modes on the `pages` level
  - Current handling of the configuration `l10n_mode=exclude` and associated issues
- **Development of our translation handling extension**
  - Agreement on design with regard to front-end output
  - Setting up a frontend build process with Grunt

## What will happen until the next report?

- Further familiarization with the creation of core patches
- Further development of the core patches we have already created
- Translation handling-related discussions with the community at T3CMD24 (14.03. - 16.03.2024 )
- Deepening the strategic issues in collaboration with Christian Kuhn

## Any scope changes?
- So far, nothing has changed in the scope of our initiative.
- Our website is up to date.
- We are currently continuing to pursue our previously mentioned focal points. These have not changed since the initiative was founded.

## Need help?

- No, currently not

## Any last words

- We are grateful that Christian is sharing his translation handling work with us. This allows us to sharpen our own understanding of core patch processes
- It is now motivating to have launched the first own WIP core patches from our team and to be able to discuss them within the team

## February Team Meeting Minutes

- [2024-02-02, 11:00 am to 12:00 am CET](https://notes.typo3.org/s/AhsOuu4sc)
- [2024-02-09, 11:00 am to 12:00 am CET](https://notes.typo3.org/s/XjJRqypcF)
- [2024-02-16, 11:00 am to 12:00 am CET](https://notes.typo3.org/s/OOMfIRbU9)
- [2024-02-23, 11:00 am to 12:00 am CET](https://notes.typo3.org/s/PcznGvQa4)