---
title: "2024-09-27 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2024-09-27<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Eric Harrer
    - Astrid Haubold
- **No participation:**
    - Jo Hasenau
    - André Buchmann
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Copying content with inline children to another language

We have dealt with the issue [#89787 'Copying element with IRRE element from one language to another'](https://forge.typo3.org/issues/89787) again. The problem here is that inline child elements of records that are copied into other languages are not assigned the target language too.

We had already seen in the session on [2024-09-13](https://notes.typo3.org/s/2CyjIgYfC#) that, in contrast to “copy”, the language in “copyToLanguage” is passed to the `copyRecord()` function and wanted to investigate whether passing a language is already the solution in the normal “copy” process. Astrid has taken up the matter and describes her findings so far.

She reports that this implies that a “l10n_parent” is set in the child elements and the “sorting” is adjusted like it would have been with the "copyToLanguage" process ("localize" is used for inline-childs). This must not happen. We note that the copy to another language can only take place if the target language is in “Free” mode (page module), which is dependent on none of the elements having an “l10n_parent”.

We suspect that the use of “localize” in the “copy” context is generally misplaced in the core code. Specifically, we see the problem in the function `TYPO3\CMS\Core\DataHandling\DataHandler::copyRecord_processRelation()`

```php
// If language is set and differs from original record, this isn't a copy action but a localization of our parent/ancestor:
if ($language > 0 && $schema->isLanguageAware() && $language != $row[$schema->getCapability(TcaSchemaCapability::Language)->getLanguageField()->getName()]) {
    // Children should be localized when the parent gets localized the first time, just do it:
    $newId = $this->localize($v['table'], $v['id'], $language);
} else {
...
```
(Line 4150-4153)

In the following, we want to check whether the use of `copyRecord()` **with** language as an alternative to `localize()` makes more sense at this point. Astrid's earlier tests in this direction led to a doubling of the relationships. She also reports that at a certain inline child level, the language information was lost. She will continue to investigate how this behavior could occur. She will continue to investigate how this behavior could occur.

Astrid will continue to deal with `$copyAfterFields` in the `copyRecord()` function of the DataHandler, which also contains language information. We assume that these are the fields of the element after which they were inserted. We note that the language of this element (contrary to the transferred language as a function parameter for copRecord) clearly provides the correct target language. However, if we consider inline child elements, no `$copyAfterFields` can be used there. In this context, the language of the function parameter must be used.

## Topic 2: Dealing with language-consistent MM relations

As we already stated in the meeting of [2024-09-20](https://notes.typo3.org/s/UwIbZ6el0#topic-4-language-consistency-on-both-sides-of-an-mm-relation), in future MM relations on both sides (`uid_local` and `uid_foreign`) must reference record uids of the same language.

We now set up the following scenario:

- A content element has a relation to a category. Both the category and the content element are only available in the default language.
- Now the content element is translated, but the category is not.

How do we deal with the relation between the translation of the content element and the category in this situation?

A)
> No relation is created. The relation is only created once the category has also been translated into the same language.
>
> **Argument:** Since no category translation exists, the category should not be displayed

B)
> A category translation is automatically created in the same language for which a relation exists.
> 
> **Argument:** This is the only way to ensure structural equality between default language records and non-default records

With the argument that the “Connected” mode in the Page module allows translation gaps, Eric currently tends towards solution A).

With regard to B), Astrid mentions that missing translations could be created but hidden by default (`hidden=1`). Then we would have DB structure equality with controllable display behavior.

We want to take up this topic again in a larger group at the next meeting.