---
title: "2025-04-04 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-04-04<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer
- **No participation:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Jo Hasenau
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: AI-Driven Workflow Optimization (Off-Topic)

Eric shared his current focus on AI-supported development workflows, particularly in connection with TYPO3 Content Blocks. He described approaches where structured YAML formats are used to separate logic and structure, enabling both better maintainability and AI-based tooling support. He also reflected on the strategic potential of using generative AI to simplify repetitive tasks, such as generating TCA or SQL definitions.

Astrid pointed out that not all AI tools integrate smoothly into daily workflows and emphasized that a critical, use-case-specific approach is still important. Both agreed that long-term efficiency can be achieved when prompts and tooling are thoughtfully designed and reused across projects.

## Topic 2: Collaboration with Olivier and Coordination of Responsibilities

Astrid and Eric discussed how to align the initiative's work with the contributions currently being developed by Olivier. Astrid would like to actively participate in the creation of the chapter “Current State Analysis” and brought up that she would like to do this as part of a paid collaboration.

They agreed that:
- Astrid would consult directly with Olivier to clarify scope, expectations and remuneration.
- The Initiative's weekly meetings would be used to reflect on and refine content together.
- The work of the initiative and Olivier should interlock in a meaningful way.

Eric emphasized that the knowledge and preliminary work from the initiative is a valuable basis for the emerging concept.

## Topic 3: Structure and Focus of the “Current State Analysis”

Astrid shared her assessment of the structure of the Current State Analysis to date. She noted that areas such as translation files (`XLIFF`, Crowdin etc.) deviate from the actual topic of the initiative - “Translation Handling” - which refers to the system-side processing of content translations within TYPO3.

Both agreed on this:
- A clear demarcation between technical focal points is necessary in the document.
- Involving the localization team can be useful for file-based workflows.
- The initiative remains focused on the systemic handling of translations, but supports an integrated overall view.

## Topic 4: Review of Systems for Competitive Analysis

Eric and Astrid talked about the selection of systems in the “Competitive Analysis” chapter. In addition to well-known systems such as WordPress, Joomla and Drupal, consideration was also given to including systems such as Shopware or NEOS in the review, as they sometimes take different approaches to translations.

In addition, it was considered useful to include at least one node-based system in the analysis in order to contrast the traditional TYPO3 approach with an architecturally different range of functions. This could help to better classify relevant design decisions in the long term.

The concrete selection and elaboration is currently in Olivier's hands.

## Topic 5: Budget and Deliverables

Astrid reported that a budget of around 30 hours has been set aside for the “Current State Analysis” chapter. She assumes that more time may be required for thorough processing - especially for visual representations such as workflow diagrams. At the same time, she emphasized the added value of this work for the initiative as a whole.

Eric emphasized the importance of avoiding overlaps and dovetailing work results in a meaningful way. The weekly meetings of the initiative should continue to serve to provide feedback on content and to ensure the quality of results.

## Topic 6: External Development Topics and Communication with Core Team

Eric reported that Benni had contacted him regarding various TYPO3 core topics:
- `sys_language_uid = -1`
- `allowLanguageSynchronization` + `IRRE`
- Bidirectional handling of `IRRE` relationships

The topics fit the objective of the initiative. Eric will contact Benni to inform him about the status of the concept and to explore possible synergies.

## Topic 7: Identified Bug in Translation Copy Workflow

Astrid described a problem when copying content elements with existing translations. These are incorrectly assigned to the standard language. She was able to narrow down the cause and create a [failing test](https://review.typo3.org/c/Packages/TYPO3.CMS/+/88827) that shows the problem.

A sustainable solution probably requires deeper changes to the `DataHandler`. Astrid signaled willingness to cooperate, but would like technical support from the TYPO3 core team.

## Topic 8: Outlook and Collaboration Moving Forward

Astrid emphasized the importance of clear role allocations and agreements in order to avoid parallel developments or misunderstandings.She will seek a direct exchange with Olivier and then contribute her findings to the initiative's meetings.

It was jointly agreed:
- The weekly meetings serve the purpose of professional reflection and quality assurance.
- Olivier's conceptual work complements the initiative and benefits from her specialist knowledge.
- The aim is to develop a resilient concept that can serve as a basis for further developments and funding opportunities.