---
title: "2025-04-11 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2025-04-11<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
    - André Buchmann
    - Astrid Haubold
    - Eric Harrer
    - Jo Hasenau
- **No participation:**
    - Sven Wappler

## Topic 1: Structuring the Current State Analysis

Astrid presented an initial draft for structuring the "Current State Analysis" section of the concept document. She proposed focusing on overarching concepts before detailing the technical implementation. Eric emphasized the need to clearly differentiate concepts like `Overlaying` and `Fallback` without duplicating information unnecessarily.

They discussed that overlays in TYPO3 are used both for language and workspace contexts, and although the mechanics are similar, they serve different purposes. Jo added that in workspaces, overlays may occur in conjunction with translations, resulting in compound overlay scenarios. The group agreed to explain overlays conceptually before delving into technical specifics.

## Topic 2: Feedback on Olivier’s Structure and Budget Plans

The team reviewed the initial structure provided by Olivier and noted that it included terminology (like “Components”) that didn’t align well with TYPO3 practices. Astrid opted for a more practical structure based on initiative knowledge.

Regarding the budget, Olivier had suggested allocating funds based on Fibonacci scaling. The team discussed the idea and noted that fundamental questions around contribution assessment remain open. Astrid mentioned that she is tracking her working hours, but would like to keep the discussion around compensation models open from her side for the time being.

## Topic 3: Technical Issues with Copying and Translations

Astrid described a significant bug introduced by a recent patch affecting how language information is handled during record copying. The bug led to incorrect behavior where copied records inherited the default language, even if they were translations. Jo and Astrid analyzed the logic, agreeing that a pre-processing validation step should prevent unintended modifications.

They discussed possible fixes, such as filtering out `$pasteUpdate` instructions based on language changes and restructuring the copy logic to prevent unintentional side effects. Astrid committed to investigating this further and potentially refactoring the copy logic to ensure proper handling of translations and language UIDs.

## Topic 4: Goals and Focus of the Concept Work

Astrid questioned whether her focus should remain on concept development rather than patching. The team unanimously supported her contribution to the concept work, as it lays a critical foundation for informed development. Eric reiterated that aligning on a solid conceptual framework was their primary goal for the quarter.

The team discussed using the concept to advocate for funding and to ensure that core contributions are built on shared understanding. Jo noted the risk of becoming disconnected from core development if the initiative’s conceptual work lags behind active coding. The group acknowledged this and emphasized maintaining visibility and communication with the Core Team.

## Topic 5: Scope of the Concept and Consideration of Extensions

The group discussed whether to include extension-based tools like the L10n Manager in the analysis. Astrid argued that these are essential from a user perspective and should be mentioned, albeit with a clear note that they are not part of the core. Jo suggested referencing Import/Export functionality and AI integrations in the context of current limitations, avoiding overly specific details.

They agreed that the document should balance internal TYPO3 accuracy with external readability—especially when shared with stakeholders unfamiliar with TYPO3. This includes contextualizing limitations in a constructive way and emphasizing TYPO3’s potential when combined with extensions.

## Topic 6: Terminology and Documentation Decisions

The team reviewed terminology choices, such as using “Language Overlay” to avoid confusion with visual overlays, and debated how to reference database identifiers like `sys_language_uid`. They discussed structuring the concept document to prioritize clarity, progressive detail, and reusability for both internal and external audiences.

Astrid also noted the importance of including a dedicated section on System Texts (`XLIFF`) while keeping it concise. These were deemed outside the core initiative scope but necessary to acknowledge as part of the broader translation system in TYPO3.

## Topic 7: Upcoming Work and Next Steps

The group agreed to cancel the next meeting due to the Good Friday holiday. Astrid will continue working on the concept document and provide updated content when ready. The team will resume collaboration in the following session.
