---
title: "2023-11-10 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2023-11-10<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
  - Eric Harrer
  - Sven Wappler
  - André Buchmann
- **No participation:**
  - Jo Hasenau
  - Astrid Haubold

## Topic 1: Review of the TYPO3 Camp Rhein Ruhr

### Session "TYPO3-Association ideas process"
Jo held a session "TYPO3-Association ideas process" in which, among other things, the topic of funding from the TYPO3 Association was discussed.
Since this possibility could become interesting for the Translation Handling Initiative in due course, we may be able to use information from the session. Jo was absent and should report briefly at the next meeting.

### Government Site Builder

Daniel Fau and René Gürth currently clarify the cooperation between TYPO3 and Informationstechnikzentrum Bund (ITZBund). It was discussed to what extent planned innovations of our initiative, which may be breaking, could lead to a spin-off of the Government Site Builder. In order to create more security, we should remain in contact and provide constant information about our plans.

## Topic 2: Language Tags - Consideration of the resulting possibilities

- Language ID mapping currently required when transferring languages between different root sites and/or instances is no longer necessary
- Global meta information (e.g. alternative or title texts) for files can be translated.Until now, it has not been possible to clearly assign translations in the meta information, as the same language can be referenced under a different identifier depending on the root site/instance.

## Topic 3: Node based storage of data in TYPO3?

Against the background that Sven is currently working on a translatable page tree, it was discussed to what extent the existing structures of TYPO3 are suitable and performant to map the required dependencies. It was mentioned that this might be more performant with a database system that works node-based.However, we currently consider a corresponding conversion in TYPO3 to be unrealistic, as this would require massive changes. For the moment, we have agreed to use the existing tables for storing structural information. What is supposedly unattractive in this context is that many fields are not used.

## Topic 4: Cloned "cache" tables for output?

It was discussed whether it makes sense to store data in separate "cache" tables. The idea would be that the existing tables are not extended, as previously planned, but automatically cloned. In this duplicate, we can then run all the processes required for high-performance and flexible output of the languages. It is conceivable that the conversion of the original data records into our "cache" tables could also run asynchronously (Symfony Message Queue), for example. It would have to be implemented in such a way that the required "cache" tables are automatically generated on the basis of the existing records so as not to cause any additional work for extension developers. According to André, this should be feasible. We would like to discuss this approach with other developers (Jo, Anja and other interested parties).

## Topic 5: relevance of the size of the database

It was discussed to what extent our approach of storing the structure level separately (via "cache" tables or directly in the existing tables) and the resulting increase in the size of the database can lead to new performance problems. According to current knowledge, doubling or even tripling the amount of data in the database would not cause any significant measurable performance restriction in the event of database failures.The provision of caching will also lead to a performance gain with regard to the simplification of the query logic.

## Topic 6: Translatable page tree

Sven presented his current development status via live broadcast. Currently, the JSON required for the page tree is already being manipulated in such a way that labels of a selectable source language and target language are supplied. The next step is to change the SVG page tree based on this JSON using JavaScript. Since we lack know-how in TypeScript, we are looking for external expertise in this area. For now, Sven is writing the necessary logic in vanilla JavaScript. The code will have to be translated into Typescript in due course.

## Topic 7: Meaningfulness of language tags compared to the use of freely selectable "dimensions"

It was discussed whether it would not make more sense to formulate generally selectable output layers that can have language references, among other things. However, it remained unclear how this could be implemented.For the moment, we would like to work on the basis of language tags in order to keep the complexity of the conversion within limits and to be able to work on the basis of a standardized string (BCP 47). If necessary, the "Dimensions" approach can be introduced at a later date.