---
title: "2023-11-17 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2023-11-17<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
  - Eric Harrer
  - Sven Wappler
  - Jo Hasenau
  - Astrid Haubold
- **No participation:**
  - André Buchmann

## Topic 1: Financing models for the initiative:
There was a discussion about various options for funding the initiative.
In this context, the new Community Ideas Budget 2024 was discussed and to what extent this can be used to obtain uncomplicated financial support for the work of the initiative.

Since we want to achieve initial results without funding shortly after the initiative was founded and do not want to take the risk of failing with the first funded project, a short-term application by the initiative by Sunday, November 19, 2023 was no longer an option.

Nevertheless, Jo has agreed to submit an application for the implementation of a prototype that aims to be able to switch between Free and Connected Mode in the TYPO3 backend. As this idea was already on the initiative's agenda, this advance is welcomed by the initiative. All supporters of this free-connected mode switch feature should vote for this prototype with the working title "TransFusion".

For the implementation of the prototype, it was recalled that the following points, which Andreas Kienast (developer of the original rejected core patch) had noted, must be taken into account:
- Converting the modal component to Lit
- Conversion from jQuery to bare JavaScript/Typescript

There was also a discussion about the extent to which the prototype should be able to take child relations such as FAL relations into account.

## Topic 2: TYPO3 in government projects and involvement in the community:
The importance of TYPO3 in government projects and the impact on the TYPO3 community was discussed. Jo reflected on the government's consideration to work closely with the community. Apparently there are plans to create a government committee similar to the Academic Committee.

## Topic 3: Translation Handling Extension
We talked about André's newly created GitHub organization for our initiative "t3thi" and about the initial status of the Translation Handling Extension, which is based on the Style Guide Extension. The idea behind this extension is that it will contain all conceivable test cases for translation handling in the future. The extension will later help us to communicate and discuss ideas and solutions both within the group and externally.

## Topic 4: Publishing Channel vs. Language-Tag
The extent to which it would make sense to create the option of formulating publishing channels instead of language-specific language tags was discussed.

It was noted that publishing channels ensure that the content is delivered in a suitable manner, irrespective of the content. A variation of the content itself, as is the case with translations, is not to be understood here.

We came to the conclusion that language and publishing channel cannot be summarized and that it may be useful in the future to introduce publishing channels in addition to the implementation of language tags. For this reason, the topic of publishing channels will not be pursued further for the time being and we will concentrate on the language level with language tags according to BCP 47.

However, in order to be able to define our own language variants in addition to the possibilities of the BCP 47 language tag, we can imagine setting up a further field that can be used to query language information if necessary and can contain any identifier. However, this field should only be used in SQL queries if it is really needed so as not to increase query complexity in the default case.

We want to determine the necessity of such an additional field in our survey. Specifically, the question is whether a significant proportion of the community needs to be able to define languages that cannot be mapped using BCP 47. If necessary, this functionality could also be made available as a separate non-core extension.

## Topic 5: Separate tables for language information
André's idea of creating separate tables to hold the status relevant to front-end output was discussed again.

In addition, the usefulness of outsourcing all translation-relevant information to separate langauge overlay tables similar to `pages_language_overlay` was discussed.

We have not yet come to a final conclusion and would like to run through the idea further in the next meeting when André is back.