---
title: "2023-11-24 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2023-11-24<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
  - Eric Harrer
  - Sven Wappler
  - Jo Hasenau
  - Astrid Haubold
  - André Buchmann
- **No participation:** -

## Topic 1: Recap of the discussions on language tags
- It was discussed how best to map language tags to cover all possible languages and variants.
- The BCP47 validator https://schneegans.de/lv/ was also recommended to ensure that the tags are valid.
- The [IANA Language Tag](https://www.iana.org/assignments/language-subtag-registry/language-subtag-registry) Registry was mentioned as a reliable source of up-to-date language information.

## Topic 2: Free-Connected-Mode Switch - Approach
- Difficulties in using TypeScript in connection with the Page module were discussed
- For questions regarding TypeScript we identified Andreas Kienast (@\_kienandreas) and Andreas Nedbal (@pixeldesu) as suitable contacts. Both already have a lot of experience with TypeScript and are working on removing jQuery from the core.
- The implementation will probably take place in a separate module in order to be independent of the contexts of the Page module.

## Topic 3: Next steps regarding translation handling survey
- We have already worked out a few questions, but there are still a few more missing. The basis for this should be the data collected so far.
- It was suggested to use Chat GPT as support for the development of the further survey. The data collected so far should be used as a basis.
- Jo will make initial attempts to identify survey topics with the help of Chat GPT before the next meeting.
- Eric will make his paid ChatGPT account available for these analyses.
- The question of storing language information in dedicated tables vs. record tables should possibly be included in the survey.
- The idea of using personas was discussed in the group. The extent to which personas can help with the development of the survey was discussed.

## Topic 4: Translation Handling Extension
- The idea behind the translation handling extension was communicated to the group
- The extension is intended to simplify handling when reproducing test cases.
- The extension may serve as a basis for automated tests.
- All test cases discussed in the initiative are to be gradually integrated into the extension.
- It was determined that changes to the data status of the extension should be able to be reset to the initial state by simple means.
- It was discussed that we would like to operate both an environment repository and an extension repository.
