---
title: "2023-11-03 - Translation Handling Initiative - Team Meeting Minutes"
tags: "Meeting"
---

# Translation Handling Initiative<br>Team Meeting Minutes

[← Back to the overview](https://notes.typo3.org/s/f3ae8fZSD)

- **Date:** 2023-11-03<br>
- **Where:** [Slack Huddle](https://app.slack.com/huddle/T024TUMLZ/C05D7UF1L8M)
- **Participants:**
  - Eric Harrer
  - Sven Wappler
  - André Buchmann
- **No participation:**
  - Jo Hasenau
  - Astrid Haubold

## Topic 1: New procedure for recording team meetings

After the failure of the recording of the last meeting, Eric has now found a new way with the help of OBS Studio in connection with VB Audio-Cable (converting the Audio output to an audio input). With the help of the VLC player, the audio track of the OBS Studio recording is extracted and then uploaded to [Noota](https://www.noota.io/) for transcription. The final summary is then generated with the help of ChatGPT and proofreading based on Nootas extracted "Topics" section.

## Topic 2: Status of the Translation Handling Initiative application
Benni Mack gave feedback yesterday (2023-11-02) that Oliver Hader is currently taking care of our application. He pointed out that this could take a few more days.

> Oli contacted Eric directly after the meeting and is currently taking care of setting up the initiative page on typo3.org. There was a conflict with our PDF. The text could not be copied out. Eric has therefore recreated the text on Notes under the following [link](https://notes.typo3.org/Ysf4_Vz4RCqnqlXS_z09NA#).

## Topic 3: Additions to "Strict" and "Free" fallback type

We discussed the effects of the default language on the display of translated elements in "Strict" mode.

It is emphasized that in "Strict" mode, the default language determines whether an element is displayed (if it is connected to an element in the default language). But: If an element is not linked to an element of the default language in "Strict" mode, this element is also displayed.

In "Free" mode, the display is not affected by the default language at all.

## Topic 4: TYPO3 language selection and fallback mechanisms

The language selection and behavior of the fallback mode in TYPO3 is discussed, as well as the impact on content output.

Differences between the output of navigation and content, as well as a different output behavior by Extbase are highlighted. It is suggested to systematically investigate any language configuration in any scenario.

## Topic 5: Standardized setup for checking the language configuration

We discussed that an automatically generated basic setup would be helpful in order to be able to test the various translation handling relevant topics in the latest version of the TYPO3 core in the future. We discussed setting up an auto-installation bash script based on DDEV, which integrates a simple site package as a distribution.

At least 3 languages and various root sites with corresponding content should be preconfigured as part of the distribution. We have discussed which cases we have to deliver as a minimum (with/without FallbackChain, a separate root for each FallbackType "Strict", "Fallback", "Free", etc.) in order to be able to map all conceivable translation handling topics directly.

Since it does not matter for our area of activity whether the language runs under a language domain or a language segment in the URL, we will use language segments in the test setup for the time being to avoid problems when logging in via different domains.

> André contacted Eric during the day that it might make more sense to just provide a "translation-handling" testing extension regardless of the environment setup. We should discuss the exact approach at the next meeting.

## Topic 6: Fictitious languages and abstraction layer

The discussion covers the use of fictional languages and the possible layer of abstraction they could provide to distance oneself from linguistic and country-based discussions.

Various options for the configuration of languages and countries are also discussed and decisions are made on how these should be used in a specific context.

The importance of distinguishing between different countries in the linguistic output to address the right target group is discussed, as well as the use of different language variants such as plain language.

## Topic 7: Discussion of different language fallback scenarios in practice

Eric noted that a fallback of, for example, an Austrian page to a German page can sometimes be useful in order to avoid having to maintain German content multiple times. André noted that this can of course also be the other way around, i.e. that Austrian content falls back to German content.

André also noted that it should be considered whether fallback makes sense if only very few elements differ in the selected language. He describes his own project in which the individual elements were replaced by JavaScript using IP-based GEO localization instead.

Sven noted that scenarios such as the use of simple language should also be considered. It was discussed what an optimal setup should look like that also maps simple language. André also questioned whether a country assignment is always necessary. It often happens that a language is to be published regardless of the country boundaries. This means that a technical limitation to certain countries could exclude target groups of the language.

## Topic 8: Looking at the Shopware approach

André showed an example of a Shopware installation. It became clear that Shopware always works in "connected mode" and provides the option of deactivating inheritance (which applies by default) across output channels and language levels for each field in order to capture specific content.

This was followed by a discussion regarding the structure and handling of databases, in particular the storage of variations and the use of key-value pairs for the flexible assignment of properties to products, as well as the challenges of dealing with translations and possible extensions.
